  United Nations  A/HRC/24/12     General Assembly  Distr.: General 8 July 2013  Original: English  Human Rights Council Twenty-fourth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review*  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.   Bangladesh Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1Ð4 3  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5Ð128 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5Ð9 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  10Ð128 4  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  129Ð132 14  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  27 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review (UPR), established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its sixteenth session from 22 April to 3 May 2013. The review of Bangladesh was held at the 11th meeting, on 29 April 2013. The delegation of Bangladesh was headed by Her Excellency Dr. Dipu Moni, Minister for Foreign Affairs. At its 17th meeting, held on 02 May 2013, the Working Group adopted the report on Bangladesh. 2. On 14 January 2013, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (Troika) to facilitate the review of Bangladesh: Czech Republic, Ethiopia and Pakistan. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Bangladesh:  (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/16/BGD/1);  (b) A compilation prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/16/BGD/2);  (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/16/BGD/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by the Czech Republic, Germany, Ireland, Liechtenstein, Mexico, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Spain and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Bangladesh through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the UPR.  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. Foreign Minister of Bangladesh Dr. Dipu Moni, MP, started her presentation by expressing profound sadness at heavy loss of lives at collapse of a building in Bangladesh. 6. She said that the Grand Alliance Government led by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina focused on building a robust normative and institutional framework during the last four years to ensure that all citizens enjoyed all human rights as guaranteed in the Constitution. She highlighted the 15th Amendment to the Constitution that restored the Fundamental Principles of State Policy for building a democratic, secular and socially just and inclusive Bangladesh. She underlined the measures taken to enhance the independence and effectiveness of the National Election Commission to hold free, fair and impartial national elections. The Foreign Minister informed that in the last four years the Parliament enacted 196 legislations, related to human rights one way or other, and ensured the function of its Standing Committees as effective bipartisan watchdogs. She also enumerated the steps taken to ensure the independence of judiciary and enhance the functional independence, effectiveness and credibility of the National Human Rights Commission, Anti-Corruption Commission and Information Commission. 7. The Foreign Minister reaffirmed her GovernmentÕs unequivocal stand on Òzero toleranceÓ against human rights violation by the law enforcement agencies as well as on their impunity. She said that any incident of death during exchange of fire between law enforcement agencies and criminals is duly investigated as per existing laws and Codes of Conduct. She expressed concern over the rising trend of abduction under false personification of the law enforcement agencies (LEAs) and said that more than 540 such criminals had already been arrested. She reaffirmed the GovernmentÕs commitment to end the culture of impunity and recounted the initiatives taken to conclude the trials of the self-proclaimed killers of the countryÕs founding President and members of his family, and to hold the ongoing trials of the local perpetrators who committed crimes against humanity and genocide during the 1971 War of Liberation through domestic tribunals, pursuing the principle of complementarity under the Rome Statute. The Foreign Minister also reiterated her GovernmentÕs commitment to build a secular society and not to countenance any threat and attacks against the countryÕs religious minorities such as the attacks on Buddhists in Ramu the previous year or the recent attacks against the Hindu community. She highlighted the Constitutional recognition given to the countryÕs ethnic groups and tribal communities through the 15th Amendment and the measures taken to implement some of the critical issues under the Chittagong Hill Tracts Peace Accords (CHT). 8. The Minister highlighted the role of the National Women Development Policy, 2011 in advancing womenÕs empowerment and the stringent laws on domestic violence prevention, anti-trafficking and pornography control to combat violence against women. She underlined the GovernmentÕs success in reducing child and infant mortality and current focus on increasing retention rate in schools, combating malnutrition and stunting, and eliminating child labour from hazardous sectors. The Foreign Minister referred to the National Labour Policy and the recent amendments to the Labour Act of 2006 to ensure better workplace safety and collective bargaining for workers. She also raised the human rights concerns of migrant workers and flagged the Expatriates Welfare Act, 2013 to promote their rights and well-being. The Foreign Minister elaborated on the concrete measures taken by her Government to protect the rights of the vulnerable and marginalized groups in society, including persons with disabilities and refugees, among others. 9. The Minister underscored the impact of poverty on peopleÕs full enjoyment of human rights and reaffirmed the GovernmentÕs commitment to the Right to Development as an essential precondition for human rights. She enumerated the positive strides made during the last four years to reduce poverty by 10 per cent, enhance food security, improve public health through community clinics, and increase investment in the education and information technology (IT) sectors. The Minister also underlined BangladeshÕs challenges as a climate-vulnerable country and mentioned the Human Rights Council Resolution steered by Bangladesh and the Philippines in 2012 on Climate Change and Human Rights in the context of climate justice. She also appreciated the role of civil society and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in complementing the GovernmentÕs development efforts and the mediaÕs contribution to expanding democratic space for citizensÕ participation. The Minister said her Government would continue to promote human rights education and awareness to ingrain a culture of human rights in society. Finally, she said that during the review period the Government had laid the groundwork for change that would enable Bangladesh to take off to the next stage of development and emancipation.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 10. During the interactive dialogue, 97 delegations made statements; among them, 94 delegations made recommendations. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in chapter II of the present report. 11. Most delegations expressed their deepest condolences and sympathy for the victims of the building collapse in Bangladesh and the Minister thanked them. 12. Montenegro expressed its deep concern that capital punishment might be imposed on individuals between 16 and 18 years old. It asked whether Bangladesh had taken any concrete measures in order to implement the recommendations of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) in this regard. 13. Morocco stated that Bangladesh had obtained very good results for achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), especially those related to health, gender equality and human development. Morocco was also satisfied with measures taken to fight against poverty and hunger. 14. Nepal appreciated substantial efforts made by Bangladesh for the consolidation of democracy. It had also made significant achievements in reducing poverty and improving the living standards of its people. It took note of progress made in gender and health related MDGs. 15. The Netherlands expressed concern at violence against women, impunity of perpetrators of these crimes, persistence of extrajudicial executions, cases of torture and brutality. 16. Nicaragua highlighted that the adoption of new laws expedited the implementation of the programme Vision 2021 leading to other national policies aimed at the full implementation of human rights. 17. Nigeria commended Bangladesh for the effort it put into preparing the report and for the progress made in promoting and protecting human rights in the country. 18. Norway mentioned arrest and killing of a number of journalists during the last years.  It was also concerned that young bloggers, which had added positively to an open and broad-based debated, had become victims of death threats. 19. Oman noted the GovernmentÕs ratification of most international human rights instruments and cooperation with human rights mechanisms. 20. Pakistan welcomed the enactment of 196 legislations, including the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) Act, the Domestic Violence Act and the Human Trafficking Prevention and Control Act. It was hopeful that further efforts would be taken to strengthen NHRC, and appreciated efforts in socio-economic areas. 21. Peru highlighted the national education policy as well as progress in the reduction of poverty, maternal and infant mortality and gender equality in primary and secondary education. It made recommendations. 22. The Philippines appreciated BangladeshÕs migrant rights protection and enhancement programmes and policies, most notably the establishment of the Expatriates Welfare Bank.  It valued its partnership with Bangladesh in advancing migrantsÕ rights. 23. Portugal welcomed the progress in achieving some gender- and health-related MDGs as well as cooperation with the United Nations Development Programme for capacity-building in treaty body reporting. It also welcomed the ruling of the Supreme Court against corporal punishment in schools. The Court also stated that legislation should be reformed to prohibit corporal punishment in the home and other settings. 24. Qatar commended the GovernmentÕs legislative and political reforms and noted measures taken for the development of childrenÕs education. It highlighted the creation of the Bangladesh Tribunal for International Crime Tribunal. 25. The Republic of Korea welcomed the passing of 196 positive legislative items related to human rights issues. It was, however, concerned about violence against women and girls, including domestic violence and forced marriage. 26. The Republic of Moldova recognized the measures undertaken to prevent and protection women and girls against violence, including domestic violence, rape and sexual harassment. 27. Romania commended ratification of the Rome Statute on the International Criminal Court and adoption of a series of policies with a clear positive impact in the areas of child labour and protection of domestic workers. 28. The Russian Federation noted BangladeshÕs success in promoting and protecting human rights and its willingness to cooperate with international monitoring mechanisms and comply with international human rights treaties. 29. Rwanda welcomed the transformation of National Human Rights into a primary institution with a clear mandate to ensure the implementation of the human rights.  It also noted significant reforms undertaken to ensure the independence of the Anti-Corruption Commission, which gained public confidence. 30. Saudi Arabia noted successes in some MDGs related to health and human development, despite limited resources. It highlighted the acceleration of development programmes targeting the poor and the needy. 31. Senegal emphasized establishment of a National Human Rights Commission, normative and institutional undertakings to consolidate institutional and legal mechanisms related to human rights. 32. Sierra Leone noted the passing of no less than 196 Parliamentary Acts, which addressed the political, socio-economic and cultural rights of the people, establishment of the Human Rights Commission, and ratification of several Conventions, among others in addition to consolidation of democracy. 33. Singapore noted putting in place of a code of conduct and rules of engagement for law enforcing agencies and the armed forces to prevent impunity and human rights violations. 34. Slovakia noted BangladeshÕ efforts to advance in human rights and commended the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (OP-CRPD) and the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC). 35. Slovenia welcomed BangladeshÕ role in promoting the right to safe drinking water and sanitation, and commended the ratification of the Rome Statute. It noted that Dalits suffered all kind of discrimination. 36. Somalia congratulated Bangladesh for its achievements. 37. South Africa noted the National Education Policy, prioritizing and improving the right to education, and the National Sanitation Strategy to achieve universal sanitation. It acknowledged reforms and training by the judiciary, police and law enforcement agencies. 38. Spain praised Bangladesh for reforms carried out since 2009 and in particular for its commitment to the right to water and sanitation as active members of the Blue Group. 39. Sri Lanka welcomed BangladeshÕs progress in human rights including (a) the adoption of 196 pieces of human rights legislation; (b) measures against terrorism, money laundering and human trafficking; (c) the positive results of its inclusive economic growth strategy; and (d) the health sector progress, especially in reducing the child mortality rate. 40. The State of Palestine welcomed adoption of the Rome Statute and the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families (CMW). It commended the 2010 Act on Domestic Violence, the 2012 Act on Human Trafficking and the 2011 National Policy on Child Development and the national policy on education. 41. The Sudan welcomed human rights promotion in Bangladesh and in particular separation of the judiciary and the executive, as well as policies aiming at empowering women and eradicating child labour. 42. Sweden urged Bangladesh to improve women and girlsÕ situation. It noted extrajudicial killings and torture by security forces. It encouraged Bangladesh to restrain the use of force by the police during political manifestations. 43. Switzerland was preoccupied with a number of cases of forced disappearance and extrajudicial executions, as well as the situation of minorities. It also expressed its opposition to the death penalty in all circumstances. 44. Thailand welcomed BangladeshÕs efforts to address human rights, particularly of vulnerable and marginalized groups, but urged it to address religious and cultural intolerance. Thailand commended progress in improving childrenÕs and womenÕs health. It welcomed the commitment to cooperate with international human rights mechanisms. 45. Tunisia encouraged Bangladesh to accelerate the process of making its national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principle and address a standing invitation to the mandate holders of the Human Rights Council, among others. 46. Turkey acknowledged the improvement of living standards, the rule of law and womenÕs empowerment, along with economic and social developments. It welcomed human rights national legislation and policies, the National Human Rights Commission, and cooperation with international human rights mechanisms and in combating human trafficking and terrorism. 47. Turkmenistan welcomed BangladeshÕs efforts to strengthen its legislative, institutional and policy mechanisms to protect human rights. It commended the efforts to bring its national legislation in line with international obligations. 48. Ukraine commended BangladeshÕ progress in strengthening the human rights protection and promotion, particularly measures to promote womenÕs rights and their involvement in public life. 49. The United Arab Emirates commended the fight against poverty, implementation of plans to provide health care, to create jobs, and to secure food, drinking water and sanitation. It noted the establishment of electronic administration to reach out to remote areas. 50. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, while noting that more progress could be done on civil and political rights, called on Bangladesh to ensure that the International Crimes Tribunal meet international legal standards, and also ensure the RohingyaÕs human rights. It urged to refrain from excessive use of force in dispersing demonstrations. 51. The United States of America commended promotion of womenÕs participation in Government and the National Human Rights Commission acknowledgment that all individuals Ð including lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) individuals Ð should be protected from discrimination. While appreciating BangladeshÕs willingness to address workersÕ safety and rights, it urged it to improve workersÕ conditions. It was concerned by political violence and impunity in the security forces. 52. Uruguay noted the ratification of the Rome Statute, the establishment of the International Crimes Tribunal, the strategy to combat corruption and the National Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking. 53. Uzbekistan noted Bangladesh progress in protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms; and wide reforms to the legislative, institutional and political mechanisms on human rights. 54. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela noted that Government action had reduced poverty by 8.5 per cent in just four years. It also noted the implementation of the National Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking. 55. Viet Nam appreciated BangladeshÕs commitment to protect democracy, human rights and fundamental freedoms, and its achievements in promoting equality, poverty reduction and health care, in spite of challenges. 56. Yemen congratulated Bangladesh for improving its human rights and for legislating to strengthen political, social, civil and economic rights, especially of women, children and ethnic minorities. BangladeshÕs national policies demonstrated its upholding of international commitments. 57. Zimbabwe noted (a) BangladeshÕs efforts to protect human rights; (b) laws addressing the marginalized population rights; (c) policies on education, child labour elimination, children and women rights; and (d) access to justice measures. 58. Afghanistan noted the establishment of new Independent Commissions, the ratification of international conventions and new legislation to enhance civil, political, economic and cultural rights of its people. It commended Bangladesh for taking measures in regard to freedom of media, expression and assembly, fighting terrorism and protecting vulnerable groups. 59. Algeria noted adoption of laws on the right to information, prevention of domestic violence and cultural institutions for small ethnic groups.  Algeria wished to know about the measures taken by the Government in view of strengthening of good governance and transparency. 60. Argentina congratulated Bangladesh for ratifying the Rome Statute and highlighted the creation of the National Legal Aid Services Organization. 61. The Minister appreciated the acknowledgment of her GovernmentÕs achievements and development model by States while also recognizing the challenges and limitations. 62. The Minister responded that children under 18 years of age were outside the jurisdiction of the death penalty. The draft National Children Act addressed the issue of minimum age for criminal responsibility. She said the death penalty was not unique to Bangladesh and its application was restricted to the most serious and heinous crimes under due legal process and judicial safeguards. Bangladesh maintained an extremely low rate of death sentences, and with provision for parole. 63. The Minister reiterated that extrajudicial killing was not permitted by law and as per Penal Code, LEAs could resort to use of force or firearms only for self-defence and protection of public life and property. She said LEAs had to justify use of force or firearms as the means of last resort. She reported that the number of deaths during exchange of fire had been reduced by a large margin to 177 during 2009Ð2012 from 546 during the preceding five years, and that such deaths were only 0.34 per cent of total number of arrests. 64. The Minister said there was no scope for impunity for LEAs under Bangladeshi laws and the Codes of Conduct and Rules of Engagement of the concerned LEAs. Any incident of human rights violation or use of excessive or firearms was subject to investigation, prosecution, legal and disciplinary actions. The Minister reported that 1,678 Rapid Action Battalion (RAB) members had so far been subjected to prosecution and conviction, including imprisonment and dismissal. 65. The Minister said allegation of torture and ill-treatment needed to be substantiated with evidence. Police Regulation of Bengal, 1912 provided a number of safeguards for protection to inmates and prisoners from torture in custody. In case of any proof of torture through legal proceedings, stern departmental action was taken against those responsible. The Minister sought support from development partners to ongoing police reforms for an organizational shift towards a consultative and service-oriented policing where scope for ill-treatment or malpractice would be minimized. 66. The Minister disagreed with the suggestion that enforced disappearance was frequently used by LEAs and clarified that the term did not exist in Bangladeshi laws, which recognized kidnapping or abduction as cognizable offences. She underlined that the association of LEAs or State machinery with such criminal acts was deliberately done to undermine their credibility and create misperception in the public mind. 67. The Minister said the Government had rescinded rules and regulations that were considered to have impeded freedom of press and has withdrawn the provision of arrest for defamation from the Code of Criminal Procedure. The Government had ensured that all reported cases of violence against journalists were followed through with investigation and prosecution, and some had been brought to closure. 68. The Minister said that the Government championed the motto: Each unto his or her own religion, but the State belongs to all. She invited the Venerable Mahathero of Seema Bihar, Ramu to say a few words, who spoke on peace and communal harmony in the country. 69. The Minister informed that, in view of recent accidents in the ready-made garments (RMG) sector, the Government had, inter alia, started developing a National Occupational Safety and Health Policy, formed a Cabinet Committee on the RMG sector and was preparing ground for implementing Better Work Programme with the International Labour Organization (ILO). 70. She said that Bangladesh maintained its cooperation with the Special Procedure mechanisms and had confirmed dates for visits by three mandate holders later this year.  On repealing Article 377 of Penal Code, the Minister underscored that laws in the country should be in harmony with social and religious mores, and that the Government did not condone discrimination against any individual on any pretext. 71. The Minister said that the draft National Children Act, 2012 would internalize CRC provisions. 72. She briefed the meeting about womenÕs enhanced political empowerment, entrepreneurship and economic entitlements, including gender-sensitive labour laws and maternity benefits. She discussed six new laws to combat violence against women and steps taken to prevent sexual harassment and acid-related violence. 73. Australia was concerned at the losses of life, injuries and damages to religious sites and property in the most recent confrontations. It called on the Government to continue to allow provision of essential humanitarian assistance to Rohingya refugees. 74. Austria commended the Rome Statute ratification in 2010 and the adoption of the 2011 National WomenÕs Advancement Development Policy. It welcomed the juvenile courts establishment. 75. Azerbaijan highlighted the countryÕs accession to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW) and the United Nations Convention Against Transnational Organized Crimes, and others. 76. Belarus underlined the active interaction with the Human Rights Council Special Procedures. It welcomed the GovernmentÕs commitment to fight human trafficking. 77. Bahrain commended Bangladesh on adopting legislation and a National Action Plan to combat trafficking in persons and on implementing a health, population and nutrition development programme. It noted that Bangladesh was on track to meet MDG-4. 78. Benin noted, among others, adoption of several laws and regulatory texts in the field of human rights and the rights of women and children. Benin encouraged Bangladesh to continue action in the framework of fight against impunity and corruption, money laundering and abolition of the death penalty. 79. Bhutan noted the establishment of numerous domestic legislative frameworks and institutional mechanisms to enhance the protection of rights of the most vulnerable such as women, children, persons with disabilities and minorities. 80. The Plurinational State of Bolivia praised the adoption of new policies for the elimination of child labour, education, the development of women and for building wells free from arsenic throughout the country. 81. Botswana highlighted the countryÕs significant progress in the promotion and protection of human rights against many challenges and despite resources constraints. It encouraged the international community to lend its support in this regard. 82. Brazil encouraged Bangladesh to keep implementing poverty reduction policies.  It praised the primary education system with phenomenal results achieved in enrolment rates and gender parity. Brazil noted the upcoming adoption of the national Children Draft Act. 83. Brunei Darussalam welcomed the achievement of the MDG-2 target of gender parity in primary and secondary enrolments. It noted the countryÕs efforts to meet the MDG target of halving the population living under poverty. 84. Burundi congratulated Bangladesh on (a) the establishment of a National Human Rights Commission; (b) policies on access to health care, free education, particularly for girls, and prisonsÕ overcrowding; and (c) its engagement to include women in decision-making public positions. It urged Bangladesh to eliminate child labour. 85. Cambodia commended the ratification of most core international treaties and conventions, including the Rome Statute.  It praised BangladeshÕs progress in poverty eradication and democracy consolidation. 86. Canada asked about progress made and steps taken to ensure and fully guarantee judicial independence as well on the involved time frames, as agreed in 2009. 87. Chad noted with satisfaction that Bangladesh had consulted all stakeholders in elaborating its national report. It also noted the normative and institutional reforms undertaken to reinforce its mechanisms of promotion and protection of human rights. 88. Chile asked if Bangladesh had considered reassessing norms permitting the imposition of the death penalty and life imprisonment to minors under 18 years of age. 89. China commended the achievements in human rights in Bangladesh. It highlighted policies to drastically reduce poverty and attached importance to womenÕs development and measures to protect women from violence. China understood the challenges faced by Bangladesh as a result of natural disasters. 90. Costa Rica welcomed the adoption of measures to combat trafficking and efforts made on climate change and disaster management. It was concerned about allegations of impunity for torture. 91. C™te dÕIvoire highlighted the ratification of international conventions and adoption of new human rights legal provisions. It noted BangladeshÕs weakness to combat women discrimination in the fields of health, employment, justice and education. 92. Cuba underlined the GovernmentÕs commitment to human rights. It highlighted positive results in poverty reduction, food security, jobs creation, universal health care, education for all and other social protection programmes. 93. Cyprus acknowledged efforts made to prevent violence against women and their better integration in the labour market. It expressed appreciation for the 2011 adoption of the National Women Development Policy. 94. The Czech Republic expressed appreciation for the comprehensive report on measures taken in the human rights area and commended Bangladesh for the progress made in institutional protection of human rights. 95. Denmark commended the advances on the Chittagong Hill Tracts Peace Accord underlining that many provisions had yet to be implemented. It highlighted considerable progress in ensuring gender equality since the 1990s. 96. Djibouti congratulated BangladeshÕs remarkable contribution in the Human Rights Council reinforcement. It called on the international community to support Bangladesh in progressively implementing human rights as announced in its Vision Program 2021. 97. Ecuador asked what measures had been adopted over the previous four years to guarantee access to justice by the poor and most vulnerable sectors of society. 98. Egypt noted that BangladeshÕs legal and institutional measures reflected its commitment to promote and protect human rights. It commended its enhancement of womenÕs and childrenÕs rights, education, food security, judicial independence, its eradication of impunity and its accession to international instruments. 99. Finland welcomed BangladeshÕs efforts to combat violence against women, but was concerned about its persistence and womenÕs difficulties in accessing justice, and its possible withdrawal of reservations to the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). It asked what further developments were envisaged therein. 100. France thanked the delegation for presenting its report and welcomed the ratification of the Rome Statute. 101. Germany welcomed BangladeshÕs measures to combat discrimination and violence against women, police misconduct and impunity, but noted little change on the ground. 102. Guatemala welcomed BangladeshÕs legislation on vagrants and homeless rehabilitation, trafficking in persons, control of pornography and policies on eradicating child labour, childrenÕs rights, protection of domestic workers and womenÕs development. 103. The Holy See highlighted BangladeshÕs work to protect human rights and encouraged it to continue the improvement of the judicial, police, military and prison systems in line with international standards. 104. Hungary commended Bangladesh for its high educational priority and corresponding budget, but said that results could be improved by constitutionalizing the right to education, as was done for secularism. It noted BangladeshÕs remarkable achievements in gender parity and womenÕs empowerment. 105. India congratulated Bangladesh on separating its judiciary from its executive, its progress in child survival, its National WomenÕs Development Policy and Digital Bangladesh, which contributed to democratizing governance. It commended Bangladesh for its commitment to fight terrorism and extremism. 106. Indonesia applauded Bangladesh for its robust normative and institutional reforms since 2009. It welcomed its many positive measures in favour of groups requiring special protection and its steps to maintain a Òzero toleranceÓ policy towards human rights violation. 107. The Islamic Republic of Iran commended Bangladesh for its significant progress in promoting and protecting human rights since the UPR 1st cycle and its multiple initiatives, especially in the areas of health care and child mortality. 108. Iraq congratulated Bangladesh on acceding to the CRPD since the UPR 1st cycle and on its efforts related to human rights, health and education. It asked what measures had been taken to strengthen gender equality. 109. Ireland welcomed BangladeshÕs ratification of the Rome Statute, its efforts to address prison overcrowding and its leading role in Climate Change and Human Rights. It encouraged Bangladesh to establish a moratorium on executions. 110. Italy noted with apprehension that child labour, sexual violence and exploitation remained widespread in Bangladesh. It welcomed the National Education Policy and the draft ChildrenÕs Act, which prohibited the death penalty for minors. 111. Japan applauded BangladeshÕs enhancement of NHRC functions and its empowerment of women. It welcomed its Òzero toleranceÓ policy on human rights violations. It encouraged it to submit reports to treaty bodies, including the Committee Against Torture (CAT) and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR). 112. Jordan commended Bangladesh for its efforts to promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms, especially its ratification of international conventions and strengthening of its institutional framework through Human Rights, Anti-corruption and National Election Commissions. 113. Kyrgyzstan noted BangladeshÕs reforms to strengthen its legislative, institutional and policy mechanisms, especially in combatting human trafficking, smuggling and related crimes, and its draft legislation to protect persons with disabilities. 114. Latvia appreciated BangladeshÕs invitation to several special procedures mandate holders, but noted that a significant number of requests had not yet been accepted. It welcomed its ratification of the ICC Rome Statute. 115. Lebanon recognized BangladeshÕs sincere efforts to strengthen human rights through new laws, policies and practices, and to uphold its obligations to implement UPR 1st cycle recommendations. 116. Libya valued BangladeshÕs policy aimed at strengthening cooperation with international law and respect for human rights, evidenced by its ratification of various international instruments. It welcomed its efforts to improve occupational safety and access to health care, its increased education budget and implementation of its 2010 education strategy. 117. Malaysia commended Bangladesh for its continued commitment to improve the human rights situation and its significant progress in health, education, poverty reduction, womenÕs and childrenÕs rights.  118. Maldives welcomed BangladeshÕs adoption of laws aimed at promoting human rights and appreciated its efforts to cooperate with Special Procedures and Mandate Holders. Maldives commend the Government for its achievements, given the number of challenges it faced, and was encouraged by its commitment to further enhance human rights in the country. 119. Mauritania noted that BangladeshÕs report and replies to questions reflected the importance given to strengthening institutional and legislative frameworks for promoting human rights in the country. It valued the many procedures and significant measures adopted by Bangladesh, specifically in relation to ethnic minorities and child labour. 120. Mexico acknowledged BangladeshÕs cooperation with the international human rights system and invited it to continue cooperation with Special procedures. It urged to increase the National Human Rights Commission financial and human resources. It made recommendations. 121. The Minister expressed concern over the recent political violence and heavy causalities suffered by police personnel as they used maximum restraint to contain violence. She said that the regressive forces would not be allowed to reverse the progress made so far. She appreciated the international communityÕs support to the ongoing trials of the perpetrators of crimes against humanity and genocide in 1971. She gave an account of the rights of the accused under the ICT Act, 1973 to ensure due process and fair trial. 122. The Minister said Bangladesh would remain committed to upholding family values and tradition as well as human rights of all individuals. The Minister informed that an Anti-Discrimination Law was in the offing to protect the rights of socially marginalized groups, who were also covered under Social Safety Net Programmes. 123. She highlighted the protection and assistance to Rohingya refugees from Myanmar, including their education in the native Myanmar language, food, nutrition, potable water, sanitation, medical facilities, skill development and security. The Government was currently developing a comprehensive policy to address the protracted Rohingya refugee situation. 124. She said that the Government had taken policy initiatives in conformity with articles 2 and 16(c) (1) of CEDAW, while reviewing the withdrawal of reservations on the same. She said that there was no difference between men and women regarding acquisition, enjoyment and disposal of property, individually or jointly, during marriage. 125. The Minister briefed about anti-trafficking measures in Bangladesh, including a comprehensive legislation and a National Plan of Action 2012Ð2014. 126. The Minister said that BangladeshÕs consideration of ratification of ILO Convention 169 would need to be contextualized within the parameters of the Constitutional provision. The Small Ethnic Groups Cultural Institutions Act, 2010 had been enacted to preserve and promote the cultural identity of the ethnic minorities. She said the draft CHT Land Commission (Amendment) Act, 2013 was at the final stage through consultation with the CHT Regional Council. She discussed the status of implementation of the CHT Accord and the development activities undertaken in the previous four year, including education, health-care and sanitation services. 127. The Minister said that ratification of OP-CAT was under consideration but a decision could be facilitated following BangladeshÕs submission of a Period Report to the Treaty Body and assessment of its capacity to fulfill obligations under the instrument. 128. The Minister reaffirmed BangladeshÕs commitment to the UPR process and expressed her appreciation to National Human Rights Commission, NGOs, civil society, media, as well as States participating in the interactive debate, Troika, Secretariat, the interpreters and Council President for their cooperation. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations129. The recommendations listed below enjoy the support of Bangladesh: 129.1. Sign and ratify the new Optional Protocol to CRC on a communications procedure (Slovakia); Accede to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure at the earliest opportunity (Maldives); 129.2. Consider acceding to CPED and OP-CAT (Peru); Consider the possibility of ratifying CPED, the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its Protocol, and OP-CAT (Argentina); 129.3. Consider ratifying the conventions on refugees and stateless persons and passing national legislation on refugees and stateless persons (Sierra Leone); 129.4. Continue efforts to harmonize its normative framework with international human rights norms to which the country has acceded, particularly those concerning the rights of the child (Nicaragua); 129.5. Take further steps in bringing domestic legislation and policies in line with its obligations under core human rights instruments such as the Convention against Torture and the CRPD (Maldives); 129.6. Take necessary measures for effective implementation of the provisions of the Convention on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional Protocol, in particular, with regard to employment and education (Tunisia); 129.7. Continue reviewing their legislations and promote womenÕs rights concerning education, employment, health care and housing (Qatar); 129.8. Further criminalize violence against women and girls, prosecute perpetrators and adopt legislation on sexual harassment (Republic of Moldova); 129.9. Implement the programme to combat violence against women and ensure that victims have access to health care and legal assistance (France); 129.10. Ensure that all acts of violence against women and girls are criminalized, that perpetrators are prosecuted and punished, and that victims of violence have access to immediate measures of protection, reparations and social reintegration (Uruguay); 129.11. Continue and step up its efforts to address cases of violence against women, particularly by providing legal, medical, rehabilitation and counselling help to the victims (Indonesia); 129.12. Continue its measures aimed at the elimination of human trafficking, people smuggling and other related crimes, including a comprehensive anti-trafficking legislation titled Human Trafficking Deterrence and Suppression Act, 2012, and the National Plan of Action 2012-2014 to combat human trafficking (Azerbaijan); 129.13. Intensify its efforts to combat and eliminate human trafficking (Nigeria); 129.14. Make every effort to put an end to the cases of kidnapping of citizens, trafficking in persons, human smuggling, and similar offences (Chad); 129.15. Continue its fight against all forms of organized crime, in particular drug trafficking and terrorism (Sri Lanka); 129.16. Take institutional building measure and effective awareness raising to combat trafficking in persons (Bahrain); 129.17. Take effective measures both in terms of institutional building and raising awareness to combat trafficking in persons (Afghanistan); 129.18. Combat the sale and trafficking in children and strengthen partnerships with all stakeholders so as to provide child victims with recovery and social reintegration services and programmes (Kyrgyzstan); 129.19. Combat the sale and trafficking in children more effectively and strengthen partnerships with all stakeholders in order to provide child victims with recovery and social reintegration services and programmes (Republic of Moldova); 129.20. With support from the UNODC and other relevant international organizations continues to strengthen its capacity to combat human trafficking and provide support for the victims of trafficking (Singapore); 129.21. Take concrete legislative measures to improve occupational health and safety, including fire safety and protection against toxic chemicals, and to safeguard the rights of workers, such as the freedom of association (Germany); 129.22. Adopt the draft legislation on the protection of the rights of persons with disabilities and deploy the necessary measures for its implementation (Mexico); 129.23. Revise and amend when necessary national legislation to ensure non-discrimination against persons with disabilities in employment and take every effort to increase employment opportunities for persons with disabilities (Slovakia); 129.24. Consider the possibility of enacting laws for the protection of the most vulnerable groups from social discrimination (Ecuador); 129.25. Continue to pursue its policy of eliminating corruption through, among others, the National Integrity Strategy adopted in 2012 (Botswana); 129.26. Make available the necessary resources to the Human Rights Commission to effectively implement its important mandate (South Africa); 129.27. Make progress in the appointment of the Ombudsman, in accordance with the Constitution (Ecuador); 129.28. Actively consider appointing a Child Ombudsman as per CRC recommendations (Algeria); 129.29. Continue to practice the adoption and implementation of national action plans in various areas of human rights to implement certain recommendations accepted in the framework of the Universal Periodic Review (Somalia); 129.30. Continue developing the institutional framework with respect to the promotion and protection of human rights (Jordan); 129.31. Implement its National Women Development Policy of 2011 and take effective measures in order to tackle the issue of early marriages (Switzerland); 129.32. Work towards empowering the institutions that uphold the promotion of human rights, good governance and the rule of law (Sudan); 129.33. Enhance its efforts to maintain its zero tolerance policy towards violations of human rights by law enforcement agencies, including through the implementation of the Police Reform Act (Indonesia); 129.34. Further its endeavours with regard to the smooth and productive activity of the National Legal Aid Services Organization (NLASO) within the country (Azerbaijan); 129.35. Continue to prioritise policies aimed at improving the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights by its citizens (South Africa); 129.36. Further accelerate its pro-people, pro-poor socio-economic policies (Zimbabwe); 129.37. Continue with its successful policies to prevent trafficking in persons, especially women and girls (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 129.38. Increase efforts to put the Domestic Violence Act into practice through public policies (Brazil); 129.39. Continue and intensify its efforts to promote human rights in all areas (Sierra Leone); 129.40. Continue its policies on improving the rights of the child (Jordan); 129.41. Continue to give particular attention to empowerment of women, children, and other vulnerable groups of the populations in the on-going and future agenda of the government (Cambodia); 129.42. Reinforce human rights education and awareness-raising programmes for parliamentarians, judges, civil servants, law enforcements agents, lawyers and journalists (Morocco); 129.43. Continue its successful efforts in the field of human right education and training (Lebanon); 129.44. Continue education and awareness raising campaigns on human rights (Peru); 129.45. Continue to ensure the full participation of NGOs, civil society organizations and the private sector in the follow up to this universal periodic review and in promoting human rights (Djibouti); 129.46. Continue its efforts to increase the awareness on human rights through training and capacity-building for those involved in law enforcement and the judiciary, with the support of the international community (Malaysia); 129.47. Continue constructive cooperation with UN mechanisms to enhance the system of the protection of human rights in the country (Uzbekistan); 129.48. Improve cooperation with human rights mechanisms, including presenting outstanding reports and approving visits for special procedures, (Sierra Leone); Continue cooperation with treaty bodies and special procedures (Peru); Consider further cooperation with the international human rights monitoring mechanisms, including treaty bodies and Special procedures of the Human Rights Council (Turkmenistan); 129.49. Focus on improving its reporting to treaty bodies (Slovenia); Continue efforts to strengthen reporting capacity to the UN human rights treaty bodies (Ukraine); Accelerate the work aimed at strengthening its capacity to report on some treaties (Zimbabwe); 129.50. Present the initial report on the implementation of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, as a matter of priority (Portugal); Submit its initial and periodic reports to relevant human rights bodies in a timely manner (Republic of Korea); 129.51. Continue in the cooperation with Special Procedures and the mechanisms, and consider issuing invitations to the special Rapporteurs (State of Palestine); 129.52. Continue to enhance its efforts to counter trafficking in persons, including to consider the possibility of inviting the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially in women and children (Belarus); 129.53. Participate more actively in the international programs of technical assistance and capacity-building in the field of human rights (Turkmenistan); 129.54. Take measures to further develop the culture of human rights in order to enhance the efficiency of human rights promotion and protection (Somalia); 129.55. Work on the strengthening international cooperation in the field of human rights (Turkmenistan); 129.56. Continue working to promote gender equality in the country (Guatemala); 129.57. Strengthen the measures taken aimed at reducing disparities between men and women in the country, particularly regarding access to education, employment and health care (C™te dÕIvoire); 129.58. Continue its efforts to promote gender equality by ensuring that women and men in Bangladesh enjoy equal rights in all life of the country (Rwanda); 129.59. To work actively towards political and economic empowerment of women (Russian Federation); 129.60. Continue efforts for the empowerment of women, children and the underprivileged sections of the society (Nepal); 129.61. Continue with the necessary attention to the empowerment of women and children care and other vulnerable groups of the population (Sudan); 129.62. Combat effectively against all discriminatory practices against women in its territory (C™te dÕIvoire); 129.63. Continue to promote and protect the rights of children and women (Djibouti); 129.64. Continue its efforts to promote and protect the rights of women, children and persons with disabilities, and pay particular attention to the population in rural areas (Morocco); 129.65. Take further steps to promote and protect the rights of children and women (Afghanistan); 129.66. Continue its work in defence of the rights of women, by promoting action to empower women (Bolivia); Take further measures aiming at womenÕs empowerment (Romania); Continue in giving particular attention to the empowerment of women and children (State of Palestine); 129.67. Maintaining its good example of restricting the application of death penalty to the most serious crime and after ensuring the proper due process and judicial safeguards (Egypt); 129.68. Take all necessary action to tackle problems of persistence of extrajudicial executions, cases of torture and brutality as well as impunity, by ensuring particularly impartiality of investigations and prosecution of those responsible (Netherlands); 129.69. Take all possible measures to address violence against women and girls (Republic of Korea); 129.70. Ensure that all forms of violence against women and girls, including domestic violence and all forms of sexual abuse, are criminalized (Finland); 129.71. Continue efforts to prevent violence against children (Pakistan); 129.72. Treat those in custody in accordance with international human rights principles, and bring to justice perpetrators of attacks on journalists (Norway); 129.73. Respect the right of defence and the rule of impartiality of judges of national courts, with regards mainly to the trials against international war crimes (France); 129.74. Ensure the fair trials to all defendants before the Bangladesh International Crimes Tribunal, being judged for crimes against humanity during the Liberation War of 1971 (Czech Republic); Take the necessary measures to ensure the independence of the International Crimes Tribunal, Bangladesh (ICT-BD), respecting the rights of all of the accused to a trial with full guarantees (Spain); 129.75. Thoroughly and impartially investigate and, if credible evidence emerges, prosecute all allegations of human rights violations, in particular enforced disappearances, custodial torture and extra-judicial killings (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 129.76. Investigate allegations of human rights violations by security force members and hold perpetrators accountable (United States of America); 129.77. Ensure the effective investigation and sanctioning of attacks against journalists and take measure to create a safe and enabling working environment for journalists (Austria); 129.78. Continue strengthening its efforts and measures to consolidate the State of Law and the effective performance of administration of justice (Viet Nam); 129.79. Undertake further steps to effectively investigate alleged human rights violations by Law Enforcing Agencies and bring to justice police or other security personnel who were allegedly engaged in acts of brutality and torture (Cyprus); 129.80. Take necessary measures to ensure that perpetrators of human rights violations are prosecuted to put an end to their impunity (Switzerland); 129.81. Continue its efforts to strengthen the rule of law by preventing human rights violations and impunity by law enforcing agencies (Singapore); 129.82. Continue to adopt measures to fight impunity and acts of torture, harassment of civilians, including those committed by law enforcement officials (Czech Republic); 129.83. Fight impunity and hold all officers and persons acting on behalf of the authorities accountable for all acts of torture and harassment of civilians (Germany); 129.84. Increase its efforts to ensure that perpetrators of extra-judicial killings and torture are brought to justice (Sweden); 129.85. Investigate all allegations of torture and ill-treatment and bring perpetrators to justice (Costa Rica); 129.86. Remove all obstacles faced by women in accessing justice, and ensure that decisions are not contrary to the law and do not result in extrajudicial punishments (Uruguay); 129.87. Take more concrete action to hold accountable those responsible of violence against women and remove obstacles faced by victims (Japan); 129.88. Reinforce efforts in the fight for elimination of all forms of violence and discrimination against women and children (Senegal); 129.89. Continue strengthening the effective application of laws to prevent, protect and criminalize domestic violence (Spain); 129.90. Take active steps to effectively reduce the incidence of early forced marriage, including through the thorough implementation of existing laws such as the Child Marriage Restraint Act, the Dowry Prohibition Act and the Prevention of Women and Children Repression Act (Canada); 129.91. Enforce the existing laws against domestic violence (Netherlands); 129.92. Prevent violence against women by proper enforcement of laws and ensure prosecution and punishment of the real offenders through proper investigation and judicial process (Pakistan); 129.93. Ensure the effective investigation and sanctioning of all cases of violence against religious minorities (Austria); 129.94. Raise the age of criminal responsibility for juvenile offenders to at least 12 years, in line with the CRCÕs general comment (Austria); 129.95. Strengthen measures in order to ensure that all children have a valid birth certificate and deploy additional and more coordinated efforts to protect children from early and forced marriages (Uruguay); 129.96. Sustaining its efforts to provide protection and support of the family (Egypt); 129.97. Continue supporting the family as the main unit of society, promote strengthening of traditional family values (Russian Federation); 129.98. Address all acts of religious intolerance and discrimination (Slovakia); 129.99. Take measures to ensure that Constitutional and legal protections for religious minorities are upheld and in particular that their places of worship are protected, including from violent attack (Canada); 129.100. Employ further measures to ensure the security of religious minorities, including Buddhists and Hindus (Japan); 129.101. Take effective measures to ensure freedom of expression and a safe enabling environment for social media (Norway); 129.102. Continue taking necessary measures to observe the balance between exercising individual rights including the right to freedom of opinion and expression, and the protection of rights and interests of others, including in terms of ensuring their security (Russian Federation); 129.103. Take steps to ensure that civil society can operate without intimidation and to ensure freedom of the press, including for independent media (Canada); 129.104. Step up its efforts to ensure that human rights defenders are protected and allowed to conduct their work without hindrance, intimidation or harassment both at the national and local level (Norway); 129.105. Continue working for the integration and empowerment of women in decision making processes (Nicaragua); 129.106. Continues its efforts to ensure greater representation of women in high-level policy and decision making institutions (Algeria); 129.107. Continue to address the problems related to the working conditions and prioritize the protection and welfare of the workers, especially the women (Turkey); 129.108. Strengthen the labor inspectionsÕ mechanisms and step up the efforts to prevent child labor (Mexico); 129.109. Ensure the enforcement within the factories of international labour rules and guarantee the safety of workers as well as their right to set up unions (France); 129.110. Ensure widespread, unannounced and rigorous factory inspections where breaches of the Labour Act 2006 occur and that those responsible are held accountable in a manner sufficient to ensure deterrence (Ireland); 129.111. Continue to pa	y attention to the rights of employees and requiring employers to provide the necessary protection and safety in the factories and industries (Yemen); 129.112. Adopt further measures to drastically improve the protection of workerÕs rights to a safe and healthy workplace (Italy); 129.113. Fully train and equip relevant authorities to enforce laws on occupational safety and health as well as the right to organize and bargain collectively (United States of America); 129.114. Consider measures to enhance work place safety in private sector, in particular in the garments sector (Sri Lanka); 129.115. Continue to promote sustainable social and economic development so as to further reduce incidence of poverty and improve living standards of people (China); 129.116. Take additional measures to enhance its social security network and to share with countries living in similar conditions its best practices aiming at improving the conditions of the social vulnerable groups in the country (United Arab Emirates); 129.117. Provide more resources for the enjoyment of social and economic rights of vulnerable groups like women, children, persons with disabilities and minorities (Viet Nam); 129.118. Continue with its inclusive economic growth strategy which has resulted in poverty reduction from 40% in 2005 to 31.5% in 2010 (Nigeria); 129.119. Continue its efforts in further enhancing the protection of economic, social and cultural rights of its people (Malaysia); 129.120. Continue its efforts to improve standard of living conditions, including promoting social security (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 129.121. Continue to take measures to fight against poverty (Bhutan); 129.122. Continue its efforts to reduce poverty (Saudi Arabia);  129.123. Take more effective measures and procedures to reduce poverty and equality in income (Iraq); 129.124. Continue to adopt measures to improve access to housing for persons with limited resources (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 129.125. Further pursue its excellent social protection programs, which now benefit over 25% of families in the country (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 129.126. Continue to fight poverty keeping in line with the countryÕs existing programmes and plans of action along with active support of the international community (Cambodia); 129.127. Continue cooperation with international community so as to improve the access to food, water and sanitation for the whole population given the countryÕs limited resources and its exposure to natural disasters (Holy See); 129.128. Pay particular attention to ensure that disaster management plans are continuously reviewed to ensure that the poorest sectors of the population do not suffer (Sierra Leone); 129.129. Continue its efforts in protecting and promoting the right to safe drinking water and sanitation nationally and globally (Egypt); 129.130. Continue to generate employment opportunities and train people for self-employment (South Africa); 129.131. Widen access to free primary health services and strengthen preventive measures on HIV/AIDS transmission to children (Thailand); 129.132. Enhance its efforts to reduce the health hazards posed by industrial activities (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 129.133. Continue strengthening its efforts in providing quality health facilities and services, particularly to address maternal and child mortality rates (Brunei Darussalam); 129.134. Further build on progress in relation to child mortality and ensure the implementation of nationwide, high quality and accessible antenatal, neonatal and under-five health services (Ireland); 129.135. Increase programs of obstetric, prenatal and neonatal care and attendance at deliveries by medical and paramedical professionals in order to continue reducing maternal, foetal and new-born mortality (Holy See); 129.136. Sustain the achievements in reducing child and infant mortality (Afghanistan); Sustain the achievements in reducing maternal mortality (Somalia); Maintain results achieved in reducing maternal and child mortality (Cuba); 129.137. Take additional measures to consolidate the achievements already made, in reducing child and infant mortality (Bahrain); 129.138. Continue the efforts to perfect the living conditions of its population, including by improving access to health care services and quality education (Cuba); 129.139. Continue to improve access to healthcare and education (Pakistan); 129.140. Continue efforts to enhance the standard of living and ensure wide access of the population to high quality education and health care system (Uzbekistan); 129.141. Continue to develop education, health so that people can enjoy education and health of higher quality (China); 129.142. Enact the Integrated Education Act, so as to ensure childrenÕs rights to education by way of a coordinated legal framework, prescribing Ð inter alia Ð the extension of the compulsory primary school at least to 13 years age (Italy); 129.143. Continue to further ensure access to sanitation facilities for girls, especially in rural schools (Algeria); 129.144. Promote more intercultural education and ensure that marginalized groups enjoy equal rights before the law (Thailand); 129.145. Adopt and implement the draft Act on the protection of rights of persons with disabilities in line with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Brazil); 129.146. Continue implementation of social programs to carry out information and education activities with regard to people with disabilities (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 129.147. Attach great importance to the promotion and protection of the rights of the person of disabilities, and put more efforts in the area of health care, particularly the health of children (Oman); 129.148. Successfully adopt Persons with Disabilities Rights Act (Kyrgyzstan); 129.149. Intensify actions in order to improve living conditions of persons with disabilities (Senegal); 129.150. Continue efforts to improve access to public services for persons with disabilities, including the electoral process (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 129.151. Continue to guarantee the rights of religious and ethnic minorities (Djibouti); 129.152. Continue working to provide State care to vulnerable and minority groups in the country, to ensure they are fully integrated into society (Nicaragua) 129.153. Fully implement the Chittagong Hill Tracts Peace Accord (Australia); Continue to implement the Chittagong Hill Tracts Peace Accords (CHT) (Ecuador); 129.154. Continue its efforts to reduce migration cost and provide greater skills development to aspiring migrant workers (Philippines); 129.155. Respect all provisions of the Convention  relating to the Status of Refugees, including the principle of non-refoulement for all persons standing at the Bangladesh borders, whose life would be threatened (France); 129.156. Adopt measures to guarantee the rights of the Rohingya refugees who are in Bangladesh, applying the principle of non-refoulement and allowing NGOs to carry out their work regarding refugees (Spain); 129.157. Promptly take effective measures to ensure the protection of refugees as well as the respect for their human rights, and provide the UNHCR and other relevant humanitarian actors with access to the sites where large numbers of Rohingya refugees are located (Canada); 129.158. Continue with measures to improve the situation of asylum seekers and refugees (Argentina); 129.159. Continue to fight corruption in all segments of society with a view to creating a suitable business environment that is conducive to attract more foreign investments which in the longer term will contribute to the economic and social development of the country (Turkey); 129.160. Continue its efforts to promote and protect human rights, in particular the economic, social and cultural rights of its citizens with the support and assistance of the international community (Bhutan); 129.161. Give continuity to fighting poverty and underdevelopment (Nepal); 129.162. Pursue its development plans as considered an alienable right and to support the current efforts to achieve development to be attained in practice (Saudi Arabia); 129.163. Continue government efforts to fully realize the right to development (Lebanon); 129.164. Continue working at the national and international levels of the issue of human rights and climate change (Bolivia). 130. The following recommendations will be examined by Bangladesh which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the 24th session of the Human Rights Council in September 2013: 130.1. Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the ICESCR (Portugal); 130.2. Accede to the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture, and to establish an effective national preventive mechanism (Maldives); Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel and Inhumane Treatment or Punishment (Germany); Ratify OP-CAT (Chile); Ratify the OP-CAT and establish its national preventive mechanism accordingly (Czech Republic); Accede to OP-CAT and the optional protocols to the treaties to which it is a Contracting Party  in order to recognize the competence of Treaty Bodies in complaints, inquiry and urgent action procedures (Costa Rica); Sign the OP-CAT (Sweden); 130.3. Ratify the OP-CAT, the ICERD and the Optional Protocols of the ICCPR (Hungary); Ratify the International Convention for Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Tunisia); 130.4. Accede to the CPED and accept the competence of its monitoring body (Uruguay); 130.5. Ratify the 1989 ILO Convention No. 169 on indigenous and tribal peoples (Mexico); 130.6. Sign ILO Convention NO. 169 that aims to protect the cultural integrity of indigenous societies and enable them to control their own development (Denmark); 130.7. Ratify the 1951 refugee convention and its 1967 protocol, the 1954 and 1961 conventions on statelessness and OP-CAT (Austria); 130.8. Remove reservations to article 2 and article 16.1(c) of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Finland); Withdraw reservations to CEDAW and its optional protocol and fully implement national policies and laws on the protection of women (Austria); Withdraw remaining reservations to the CEDAW and give priority to the implementation of the Domestic Violence Act (Denmark); 130.9. Implement the Uniform Family Code as well as withdraw its reservations against CEDAW (Sweden); Adopt without delay a uniform Family Code that fully complies with the provisions of CEDAW (Germany); 130.10. Consider withdrawing its reservations on Articles 76 and 77 of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of the All Migrant Workers and Their Families (Philippines); 130.11. Complete the process of aligning its national legislation with the provisions of the Rome Statute (Tunisia); 130.12. Take concrete legislative measures to grant for the minimum age of admission to employment as laid out by ILO Convention No. 138, in a comprehensive manner (Germany); 130.13. Review its national legislation in order to ensure its full alignment with the obligations under the Rome Statute, including adoption of the provisions enabling the cooperation with the Court (Latvia); 130.14. Take steps to strengthen the implementation of the National WomenÕs Advancement Policy, including by removing its reservations to the CEDAW (Australia); 130.15. Adopt an action plan to address the situation of Dalits and eliminate discrimination against them, including by ensuring access to safe drinking water and sanitation (Slovenia); 130.16. Issue a standing invitation for UN human rights special procedures and accept all requested visits by the mandate holders (Hungary); Issue an open invitation to the Special Procedures (Guatemala);Extend a standing invitation to all thematic special procedures (Montenegro); Consider extending an open invitation to special procedures (Iraq); Step up its cooperation with the special procedures of the Human Rights Council by responding positively to the pending visitsÕ requests and consider extending a standing invitation to all the special procedures mandate holders (Latvia); 130.17. Issue an early invitation to the Special Rapporteur on the Freedom of Expression (Norway); 130.18. Agree to and facilitate an early visit by the UN Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 130.19. Explicitly prohibit corporal punishment in all settings, including the home (Portugal); 130.20. Set up an independent and impartial commission of inquiry on any alleged case of forced disappearance or extrajudicial execution (Switzerland); 130.21. Provide the maximum legal and professional protection to those working in the garment and handcraft professions sector (Mauritania); 130.22. Ensure protection of minorities, including indigenous minorities, in conformity with its international obligations (Switzerland); 130.23. Continue improving the conditions of children, women, Dalits, indigenous people, refugees and migrants taking into account the special situation and difficulties that those groups have to overcome (Holy See); 130.24. Develop and implement appropriate, efficient measures to protect indigenous women and children from all kinds of violence and discrimination (Slovakia); 130.25. Ensure free access and without constraints of the NGOs to the Rohingyas in the CoxÕs Bazaar district (France); 130.26. Grant permission and access to aid agencies to provide humanitarian assistance to Rohingya and others in the Bangladesh-Burma border region (United States of America). 130.27. Respect, protect and fulfill the human rights of stateless Rohingya persons, prioritize improving the situation of the Rohingya refugees, finalize its refugee policy and take measures to reinstate the resettlement programme (Czech Republic). 131. The recommendations listed below did not enjoy the support of Bangladesh: 131.1 Amend legislation in force to prevent the imposition of the death penalty and life imprisonment for offenses committed by minors under the age of 18 years, with a view to abolishing the death penalty (Uruguay); 131.2. Consider repealing article 377 of the Criminal Code (Chile); 131.3. Establish the de facto moratorium on the death penalty and accede to the ICCPR Second Optional Protocol (Montenegro); Abolish the death penalty (Burundi); Establish a moratorium on the death penalty, as a first step towards complete abolition of this practice and accession to the Second Optional Protocol of the ICCPR (Australia); 131.4. Take steps leading to a formal abolition of the death penalty (Slovakia); Consider the eradication of the death penalty (Bolivia); Consider the abolishment of the death penalty (Romania); Consider abolishing the death penalty or at least establishing a moratorium on executions (Holy See); Reconsider its position vis-ˆ-vis the capital punishment with the ultimate aim of abolishing the death penalty totally (Turkey); 131.5. Establish an official moratorium on executions, with the aim to abolish the death penalty (Switzerland); Introduce a moratorium on all executions as a first step towards final abolition of the death penalty (Austria); Establish a moratorium on executions with a view to abolish capital punishment (France); Establish a moratorium on all death sentences and executions (Italy). 132. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex [English only]   Composition of the delegation The delegation of Bangladesh was headed by Her Excellency Dr. Dipu Moni, Minister for Foreign Affairs and composed of the following members: ¥ Mr. Md. Shahidul HAQUE, Foreign Secretary; ¥ H.E. Mr. Md. Abdul HANNAN, Ambassador and Permanent Representative Permanent Mission of Bangladesh to the United Nations Office in Geneva; ¥ Mr. Naba Bikram Kishore TRIPURA, ndc, Secretary, Ministry of CHT Affairs;  ¥ Mr. M. K. RAHMAN, Additional Attorney General; ¥ Mr. Paban CHOWDHURY, Director General (Additional Secretary), Prime MinisterÕs Office; ¥ Dr. Kamal Uddin AHMED, Additional Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs;  ¥ Dr. Md. Javed PATOWARI, Additional Inspector General of Police (Special Branch); ¥ Advocate A. K. M. Saiful Islam, Prosecutor, International Crimes Tribunal, Bangladesh (ICT-BD); ¥ Ms. Tahmima BEGUM, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Women and Children Affairs; ¥ Mr. Priyatosh SAHA, Director General, Legal Affairs,  MOFA and Private Secretary to the HonÕble Foreign Minister; ¥ Ms. Saida Muna TASNEEM, Director General (UN), Ministry of Foreign Affairs; ¥ Mr. Md. Nazrul Islam, Minister, Permanent Mission of Bangladesh, Geneva; ¥ Ms. Nahida SOBHAN, Minister, Permanent Mission of Bangladesh, Geneva; ¥ Mr. Aminul Islam, Deputy Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employment; ¥ Mr. Faiyaz Murshid KAZI, Director (UN), Ministry of Foreign Affairs; ¥ Ms. Shanchita HAQUE, Director (FMO), Ministry of Foreign Affairs; ¥ Advocate Kawsar AHMED, UPR Consultant; ¥ Mr. Mohammad Al Alamul EMAM, Assistant Secretary (UN-1), Ministry of Foreign Affairs; ¥ Mr. Sreemath Satyapriyo MAHATHERO, Principal, Seema Bihar Ramu, CoxÕs Bazar; ¥ Mr. Sunandapriya VIKKHU, Attendant to the Mahathero; ¥ Advocate Rana Das GUPTA, Secretary General Hindu, Buddhist & Christian Unity Council; ¥ Mr. Gyanendriya CHAKMA, Director, BIRDEM & Trustee, Buddhist Religious Welfare Trust, Ministry of Religious Affairs.     