Distr.: General 6 January 2014 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-fifth session Agenda item 6 Universal periodic review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Jordan * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.14-10063 *1410063* Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1Ð4 3 I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5Ð117 3 A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5Ð25 3 B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 26Ð117 6 II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 118Ð121 15  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 26 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its seventeenth session from 21 October to 1 November 2013. The review of Jordan was held at the 7th meeting on 24 October 2013. The delegation of Jordan was headed by H.E. Dr. Mohammad Hussein Al Momani, Minister of State for Media Affairs and Communications. At its 14th meeting, held on 31 October 2013, the Working Group adopted the report on Jordan. 2. On 14 January 2013, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Jordan: Libya, Montenegro and Thailand. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Jordan: (a) A national report submitted or written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/17/JOR/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/17/JOR/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/17/JOR/3 and Corr.1). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Germany, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Jordan through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. In his introduction the head of the Jordanian delegation emphasized that the universal periodic review formed a chance for Jordan to assess its human rights situation based on self-criticism and reiterated JordanÕs commitment to collaborating with all partners to ensure the success of the mechanism and the success of the Human Rights Council. 6. The delegation stated that over the past four years, there has been unprecedented progress in terms of reform and promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms, despite the serious security implications and disorder witnessed in the region. These regional developments did not slow down the reform, but the Arab Spring, as His Majesty King Abdullah has repeatedly affirmed, is an opportunity to accelerate the reform process as a domestically-driven process and a model for the region. Jordanian reform is gradual and rooted in peaceful transformation, pluralism, societal consensus, tolerance and respect for the opinions of others. 7. The delegation stated that the pillars of the reform are rooted in the Constitution which guarantees the protection of fundamental rights and freedoms of individuals. Accordingly, two years ago about one third of the articles of the Constitution were amended in compliance with international standards. The amended Constitution prohibits any violations of rights and freedoms, upholds dignity and provides physical and moral protection for all citizens. It also gives all Jordanians the right to work and to establish trade unions and political parties and ensures that the right to education is free and compulsory. 8. The delegation stated that constitutional amendments also protect mothers and motherhood and people with disabilities. The amendments guarantee, inter alia, freedom of opinion, of the press and of expression, as well as literacy, artistic and cultural freedoms and privacy in personal communications, and that no civilian can be tried before non-civilian judges. Jordan has enacted legislation, including laws on political parties, elections, public gatherings and press and publications. The new Independent Election Commission enhances transparency and the Constitutional Court oversees the constitutionality of laws. 9. The delegation stated that two major achievements in 2013 have marked the path to democracy and comprehensive reform: parliamentary elections in January took place in the framework of impartiality and transparency in accordance with the best international practices and with the observation of local and international monitors. Voter registration exceeded 70 per cent, despite calls for a boycott, and a 57 per cent voter turnout which was among the highest in the history of the country. All components of Jordanian society are now represented in the current parliament. Following the elections, the King voluntarily waived his constitutional right to appoint the Prime Minister and for the first time asked the parliament to make the nomination. The second important event was the holding of transparent municipal elections last August. In these elections the representation of women increased to 36 per cent from 25 per cent previously. Moreover, the King has recently issued four discussion papers in order to contribute to a national dialogue on the best democratic model to which Jordan aspires. 10. The delegation highlighted the KingÕs order to the Government to amend the law of the State Security Court and limit its powers to the crimes of treason, espionage, terrorism, drug-related crimes and counterfeiting of currency. 11. The delegation stated that in order to further strengthen the rights of women and their participation in public life and the promotion of equality and put an end to certain social practices, Jordan has introduced amendments to several laws. Additional new laws have been enacted, such as the Law on Protection from Domestic Violence, laws on the prohibition of trafficking in human beings while the Personal Status Law of 2010 enhanced the rights of women and children. The delegation emphasized that the Penal Code had been amended in order to put an end to practices that stand in the way of effective implementation of human rights, such as so-called crimes of honour. To enhance the status of women and to ensure the elimination of all forms of violence, the legislative amendments increased sanctions for crimes of physical violence and such crimes as rape, indecent assault, abduction, and sexual harassment. 12. The delegation stated that in order to promote womenÕs participation in decision-making and raise the level of representation of women, the legislative amendments of 2012 increased the quota of seats in parliament allocated to women to 15 and the elections in 2013 witnessed an increase in the number of women in parliament to 18, 3 of whom won their seats outside the quota. The proportion of women in Parliament increased from 10.8 to 12 per cent. Consequently the proportion of women in senior positions also increased and three women currently occupy ministerial posts. There are 142 female judges comprising 15 per cent of the total in the country. The amended Municipalities Law of 2011 raised the quota allocated to women to 25 per cent of the members of municipal councils. In order to empower women economically and achieve equality in the workplace the Government reviewed and amended a range of economic legislation related to women, including the Social Security Law and also implemented laws obliging larger employers to provide childcare. 13. The delegation affirmed that in combating torture the constitutional amendments of 2011 included the explicit prohibition of torture. Article 208 of the Penal Code criminalizes torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Guidelines and manuals for investigating torture crimes and for pretrial detention have been prepared to help judges and prosecutors to register and prosecute cases of ill-treatment and to reduce pretrial detention. 14. The delegation stated that public security personnel do not enjoy any kind of immunity from prosecution. Suspects are tried before the Police Court, which is independent and tries public security personnel. The amended Public Security Act provides for the inclusion of civilian judges in the police court in order to increase the appropriate guarantees for a fair trial. Grievance mechanisms are available for anyone who wishes to complain. Protection of the rights of the child will be increased through the draft child rights act and a national framework to combat child labour has been prepared to protect children from economic exploitation. Social care services have been improved through adopting quality assurance mechanisms. 15. The delegation stated that in order to continue efforts to improve the living conditions of persons with disabilities, Jordan had taken many steps aimed at achieving this goal, including supporting their right to live independently, integration in the community and self-reliance. 16. The delegation indicated that Jordan continued its cooperation and constructive dialogue with the treaty bodies and special procedures, including submitting its reports. 17. With regard to the promotion of freedom of opinion and expression, in addition to the constitutional guarantees, the delegation noted that Jordan had enacted legislation that provided an enabling environment for freedom of expression and the free exchange of information as one of the pillars of its democratic transformation. It launched the national media strategy for the years 2011Ð2015, which aims to create an environment that supports independent media and establish the appropriate legal framework to ensure a balance between freedom and responsibility. The committee in charge of monitoring the implementation of the media strategy completed work on a number of pieces of legislation, such as the Press and Publications Law, Law on the Protection of State Secrets and Documents, Audiovisual law and Law on Access to Information. 18. The delegation stated that in 2012 parliament amended the Press and Publications Law to regulate the work of news websites and in order to increase transparency and accountability. There was a desire on the part of owners of news websites and the Government to organize the profession and to protect the sector from intruders who have practiced embezzlement, defamation and blackmailing to a degree that threatened social peace. The law includes several positive measures, such as the prevention of imprisonment of journalists, and has reduced the length of litigation procedures. The law does not impose fees for registration of news websites. The Government cannot block licensed websites without a court order. The provisions of the law do not affect the level of press freedom and have not reduced the level of criticism of Government policies. The law requires editors to be members of the journalistsÕ union and also guarantees the rights of workers to social security and health insurance. 19. The delegation emphasized the GovernmentÕs openness to dialogue with everyone about all laws and regulations. No registration request has been refused to any electronic news media. Thirty two radio stations, 44 local television stations and140 news websites are licensed while 118 specialized websites are outside the scope of the Press and Publications Law. 20. The delegation emphasized that, in order to combat the abuse of foreign workers, the Inspectorate of the Ministry of Labour makes field visits ensuring the safety of the work environment and ensuring the protection of the rights of workers. An anti-trafficking unit has been established for prevention, protection and prosecution. 21. Thanks to its achievements in realization of the Millennium Development Goals, the delegation noted that Jordan has been selected to be among the 65 countries which will prepare the development agenda beyond 2015. Her Majesty Queen Rania Al-Abdullah has been chosen by the Secretary-General to be one of the 26 global figures tasked with identifying the new targets. Jordan has developed a comprehensive policy for health-care services through increased numbers of hospitals, clinics and health centres. 22. The delegation emphasized that the Constitution underlines judicial independence. The Independent Judicial Council considers the appointment of judges and all related matters. 23. The delegation stated that the Constitution guarantees the right of peaceful assembly which has been seen in thousands of peaceful marches. The security forces have shown the highest professionalism in protecting participants, with the exception of some isolated incidents which have been dealt with in the framework of the law and in compliance with international human rights standards. 24. The delegation acknowledged the challenges facing the reform process, which Jordan strives to overcome, particularly the effects of the economic situation and high energy costs. The influx of refugees to Jordan in general, and from Syria in particular, presents significant challenges for the limited resources of the country. In this context, Jordan has called on the international community to shoulder its legal and moral responsibilities in supporting the country in fulfilling its obligations as a host country and to find a solution to ensure the return home of the refugees in a manner that preserves their safety and human rights. 25. The delegation emphasized that ending the Palestinian-Israeli conflict would have the greatest impact on the maintenance of peace and security in the region and thus the promotion and protection of human rights. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 26. During the interactive dialogue 75 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 27. Nigeria commended the Government of Jordan for gains made in promoting and protecting human rights, especially in education, health and the rights of women, children and persons with disabilities. It made recommendations. 28. Norway was concerned that, despite positive developments, women were still discriminated against within the legal system and violence against women remained widespread. Despite the accepted recommendations, Norway noted tight restrictions on freedom of expression which had intensified since the Arab Spring, as reflected in the amendments to the Press and Publications Law. It made recommendations. 29. Oman noted the efforts of Jordan to combat discrimination and encourage political participation. It also commended recent efforts and strategies that aim to promote and protect human rights. It made a recommendation. 30. Pakistan appreciated the enactment of legislation on domestic violence, judicial independence and childrenÕs rights. It acknowledged the GovernmentÕs efforts to protect the rights of women and children rights and legislative measures to enhance the representation of women. It made recommendations. 31. The Philippines praised the amendments to the Constitution and welcomed the enactment of laws and regulations strengthening the human rights legislative and institutional framework. It commended the success in meeting the Millennium Development Goals. It urged Jordan to implement the international standards on the rights of migrant workers. It made recommendations. 32. Qatar hailed the fostering of democracy and reforms to better protect human rights and fundamental freedoms, despite the challenges prompted by changes in the Middle East, specifically the influx of Syrian refugees. Qatar commended Jordan for continuing to host large influxes of Syrian refugees without discrimination. It welcomed the new national strategy to promote and protect human rights. It made recommendations. 33. Romania congratulated Jordan on amending the Constitution and creating the Constitutional Court and Independent Election Commission which, along with its strategies and policies, demonstrated the human rights focus of the reform process. It commended the interreligious coexistence in the country. It made recommendations. 34. The Russian Federation noted the national strategies Jordan had implemented, particularly those to combat trafficking in persons and ensuring the rights of women and children. It also assessed positively the democratic reforms undertaken by the Government. It made recommendations. 35. Rwanda complimented Jordan on withdrawing its reservation to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and on its efforts to increase the number of women in decision-making positions. It commended it for its standing invitation to the special procedures and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). It made recommendations. 36. Saudi Arabia noted that Jordan continues to receive and host large influxes of Syrian refugees, despite the negative implications in terms of available resources and infrastructure. It commended the willingness of the country to promote and protect human rights, as reflected in its constitutional amendments and adoption of numerous laws. It made recommendations. 37. Sierra Leone commended the steps taken by Jordan to promote human rights, particularly the enactment of over 30 laws, its positive response to requests from Special Rapporteurs, its constitutional amendments, the implementation of human rights-related legislation and institutional capacity-building. It made recommendations. 38. Singapore noted the passing of the Personal Status Act to further strengthen the protection of women, including against forced marriages and domestic violence, and its amendments to the Social Security Act and Labour Code, as well as improvements to the education system. It made recommendations. 39. Slovakia noted the constitutional amendments prompting positive reforms and invited Jordan to ensure their full application. It observed that more needed to done to address womenÕs status and rights, despite the efforts already made, which included the withdrawal of its reservation to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. It made recommendations. 40. Slovenia commended the positive changes Jordan had made, but was concerned that impunity in cases of domestic and gender-based violence remained a problem. It regretted that, despite its acceptance of a relevant recommendation, Jordan had not criminalized the corporal punishment of children in the home and in alternative care. It made recommendations. 41. Spain asked the delegation what conditions were required for withdrawing its reservations to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, whether the Government envisaged introducing a universal de jure moratorium on the death penalty and what plans it had to increase dialogue with human rights defenders. It made recommendations. 42. Sri Lanka welcomed the efforts of Jordan to protect women from domestic violence and children from economic exploitation and its measures to promote female empowerment and participation in public life. It commended the provision of universal educational opportunities. It made recommendations. 43. The State of Palestine welcomed the withdrawal of reservations to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the adoption of the Personal Status Law for 2010. It hailed the mainstreaming of human rights in educational curricula and encouraged Jordan to increase its gender equality efforts. It made recommendations.  44. The Sudan noted measures adopted to ensure the promotion and protection of human rights and amendments to national legislation to bring it into line with the recommendations made regarding human rights. It made recommendations. 45. Switzerland welcomed the moratorium on capital punishment. It expressed concern over media and press freedom and over the number of prisoners held in administrative detention, despite acceptance by Jordan of previous recommendations to improve those areas. It made recommendations.  46. Thailand commended political reforms strengthening parliamentary democracy. It noted the importance attached to promoting womenÕs rights and strengthening gender equality, as well as efforts to address poverty and hunger, provide education for all and improve the health of women and children with a view to achieving the Millennium Development Goals. It made recommendations. 47. Tunisia commended the recent constitutional amendments and the separation of powers that led to the independence of the judiciary, as well as the adoption of a national plan for the economic and social empowerment of women. It encouraged Jordan to combat discrimination against women and domestic violence and to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. It made a recommendation. 48. Turkey welcomed steps towards political and economic reform, stressing the importance of an inclusive reform process. It noted the efforts of the Ministry of Political Development and Parliamentary Affairs to establish constructive dialogue with all political groups. It called for further promotion of the empowerment of women and gender equality. It made recommendations.  49. Ukraine noted the efforts of Jordan to implement the recommendations accepted under the first cycle of the universal periodic review. It also noted comprehensive reform with a human rights focus and welcomed the constitutional amendments and national strategies to advance human rights. It recognized the commitment to eliminate torture. It made recommendations.  50. The United Arab Emirates noted legislative and institutional reforms to protect human rights and attain social justice. It encouraged Jordan to continue efforts to strengthen human rights. It made recommendations. 51. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland urged member States to support the hosting of Syrian and Palestinian refugees by Jordan. It expressed concern over the amended Press and Publications Act and the closure of nearly 300 news websites. It made recommendations.  52. The United States of America commended the commitment to limit the jurisdiction of the State Security Court. It noted challenges regarding freedom of expression. It expressed concern over the situation of persons with disabilities and of migrant, domestic and child workers. It made recommendations.  53. Uruguay highlighted the constitutional reform reinforcing the principle of the separation of powers and measures to strengthen the independence of the judiciary, the respect for human rights and the principles of justice and equality. It made recommendations.  54. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela noted the cooperation of Jordan with the human rights treaty bodies. It commended the national strategy for persons with disabilities to ensure them a dignified and sustainable life and the investment in education, which has increased the school enrolment rates. It made recommendations. 55. Viet Nam noted efforts to improve socioeconomic development, the legislative system and national mechanisms to protect human rights. It commended achievements in social security, employment and the participation of women in political and economic activities. It made recommendations.  56. Yemen welcomed the adoption of laws and strategies to promote civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights. It commended public awareness campaigns to foster a human rights culture and the alignment of national legislation with international human rights standards. It made a recommendation. 57. Afghanistan noted cooperation with international human rights bodies and mechanisms and welcomed strategies to further civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights. It noted efforts to ensure the rights of women and children and align national legislation with international standards. It made a recommendation. 58. Algeria noted the creation of mechanisms to implement the recommendations of the first cycle of the universal periodic review. It highlighted the adoption of strategies to strengthen civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, particularly for marginalized groups. It made recommendations.  59. Argentina noted efforts to promote the political participation of women and ensure their socioeconomic rights. It welcomed the importance attached to the elderly and the national strategy to assist orphans. It urged Jordan to continue adopting measures to limit the use of preventive detention and to eliminate torture. It made recommendations. 60. Australia recognized the pressure the Syrian conflict was placing on Jordan and commended its immense generosity in hosting Syrian refugees. It also commended its withdrawal of a reservation to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. It made recommendations. 61. Austria commended the efforts of Jordan in hosting Syrian refugees and the measures to implement the recommendations of the first cycle of the universal periodic review. It was concerned about amendments to the Press and Publications Law, which threatened freedom of expression and extended control over online media and about the use of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners. It made recommendations. 62. Bahrain paid tribute to Jordan for strengthening the rights of women and gender equality. It noted the enactment of new legislation on women victims of violence and trafficking in persons, as well as laws and initiatives to protect human rights. It made recommendations. 63. Bangladesh noted achievements in education, the empowerment and participation of women, the protection of migrant workers and the provision of human rights education and training for judicial officials. It made recommendations. 64. Belgium noted constitutional amendments and the adoption of new legislation to bring it into line with international standards. It encouraged a move towards a de jure moratorium on the death penalty. It expressed concern about the status of women in Jordan. It made recommendations. 65. Bhutan welcomed amendments to the Constitution and Criminal Code, measures to enhance the rights of women and children through several national strategies and efforts to create awareness of human rights, including through school and university curricula and training programmes for law enforcement officers. It made a recommendation. 66. Bosnia and Herzegovina noted progress since the first cycle of the universal periodic review, especially in the field of the independence of the judiciary. It congratulated Jordan on its constitutional amendments and on updating its political and civil laws. It requested more information on future steps to be taken to ensure the empowerment of women and their increased participation in political life. 67. The delegation of Jordan thanked the member States for their comments. Regarding the Press and Publications Law and the amendments proposed by the States, the delegation repeated its earlier comments on the purpose of the law and stated that it had not been enacted to lower the ceiling of liberty for journalists in Jordan, but rather to streamline and organize the work of the electronic news websites. The Government has stated that it is continuing to consider amending all relevant laws, including the Press and Publications Law, and a national dialogue is to be hosted by the designated committee in the parliament. 68. The delegation stated that the Personal Status Law of 2010 limits the minimum age of marriage to 18, with limited exceptions that aim to protect the human rights of those below 18 years of age. Consequently, the Government has managed to reduce the number of marriages of those aged between 15 and 18. This law includes several measures that ensure the best protection for women and families. 69. Regarding the reservations of Jordan to article 16 of  Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the delegation stated that personal status laws, which are based on Islamic sharia law, guarantee protection for women and children. 70. In relation to the rights of women to inheritance and the comments that there is discrimination in the rights to inheritance, the delegation noted that the percentages of inheritance for women are fixed in sharia law. However, for the first time in Jordan, the personal status law clearly defines the rights of women to inheritance with a fixed percentage and shares that cannot be reduced. There are also cases where men inherit less than women. In 85 per cent of cases, the custody of children is granted to women. 71. Regarding public participation in lawÐmaking, the delegation emphasized that the Personal Status Law (2010) was drafted after consultations and dialogue with civil society and a high degree of consensus had been reached. The same law allows women the right to divorce and end a marriage.  72. The delegation stated that female domestic workers are protected by the Labour Law of 1996, which limits their working hours to eight per day, regulates the manner of payment of their salaries and prohibits the withholding of passports by employers. The Ministry decided to designate a liaison officer to handle all issues of migrant workers with their relevant embassies. 73. Brazil noted the withdrawal of reservations to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the approval of a bill on protection from domestic violence, but expressed deep concern about the practice of allowing perpetrators of rape to escape prosecution by marrying their victims and about Òhonour crimesÓ. It made recommendations. 74. Brunei Darussalam acknowledged the commitment of Jordan to human rights, as evidenced in the enactment and amendment of human rights laws. It appreciated the measures on the empowerment of women and the fight against discrimination against them, on the protection of persons with disabilities and cooperation with the international community through various means. It made recommendations. 75. Cambodia commended the adoption of measures to support civil, economic, social and cultural rights and legislation to strengthen human rights and fundamental freedoms. It highlighted constitutional amendments relating to the separation of powers and independence of the judiciary. It made a recommendation. 76. Canada asked what further steps would be taken to promote an open and free press without fear of retribution. It welcomed the Independent Election Commission Act. It was concerned about reports of civilian detainees brought before the State Security Court, particularly peaceful protestors (including children) and journalists. It made recommendations. 77. Chad noted the adoption of a number of laws and the setting up of several bodies and institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights. It made a recommendation. 78. Chile welcomed government efforts and initiatives at the national level to promote and protect human rights, notably the Electoral Law of 2010. It urged Jordan to redouble its efforts to fight against child labour and guarantee the education of children. It made recommendations. 79. China congratulated Jordan on its many achievements in protecting human rights. It noted the measures adopted to promote gender equality and protect children with disabilities and highlighted the judicial reforms undertaken by Jordan. It made recommendations. 80. Costa Rica noted the constitutional reform, which strengthened judicial independence and established procedural rights in criminal proceedings. It commended child protection measures against economic exploitation, but urged Jordan to consider withdrawing its reservations to the Convention on the Rights of the Child. It praised advances in the rights of women and urged their implementation in practice. It made recommendations. 81. Cuba noted the steps taken to ensure gender equality and protect women and children, notably the adoption of legislation such as the Personal Status Act. It praised child protection initiatives to combat child labour and violence against children and guarantee the right to education. It made recommendations. 82. Cyprus commended the commitment of Jordan to human rights, particularly concerning the rights of women and its constitutional amendments and interreligious coexistence. It requested examples of measures envisaged to empower women politically and economically. It made a recommendation. 83. Denmark was concerned that some Jordanian laws hindered free and open political debate. It commended the increased collaboration with civil society regarding torture and encouraged Jordan to continue those efforts. It welcomed amendments to the Constitution. It made recommendations. 84. Djibouti appreciated the efforts to strengthen the institutional human rights framework in Jordan, particularly regarding women and children. It welcomed the dissemination of a human rights culture and urged the international community to assist Jordan in supporting the refugees. It made recommendations. 85. Ecuador noted amendments to the Labour Code aimed at protecting migrant domestic workers and the ratification of the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. It commended the commitment of Jordan to combating torture, reflected in the constitutional reforms. It made recommendations. 86. Egypt highlighted the difficulties faced over the large numbers of refugees that Jordan is currently hosting and inquired about the international aid that was needed to assist the refugee population. It appreciated progress in the rights of women and children. It made recommendations.  87. Estonia acknowledged the efforts of Jordan regarding Syrian refugees. It commended the increased participation of women in decision-making and the promotion of freedom of expression. It encouraged Jordan to withdraw its reservations to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and to eliminate restrictions on news websites. It welcomed the implementation of the Rome Statute. It made recommendations. 88. France welcomed the commitment of Jordan to promoting and protecting human rights, particularly the rights of women. It welcomed the moratorium on the death penalty, which had been in place since 2006. It made recommendations.  89. Germany asked what steps had been taken regarding JordanÕs reservations to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, to prevent discrimination against women in general, reinforce the principle of universal election, improve equal representation in constituencies and ensure equality of votes. It made recommendations. 90. Greece asked what measures were planned to increase the number of women in decision-making posts. It requested information on the results of actions taken to combat human trafficking and examples of best practices in that area. It made recommendations. 91. Guatemala commended several national strategies and plans on employment, political development, women, persons with disabilities and children, which demonstrated the commitment of Jordan to human rights. It appreciated the contribution of the Jordanian armed forces to international peacekeeping within the United Nations framework. It made a recommendation. 92. Hungary noted the assistance provided to Syrian refugees and encouraged the establishment of a national legal framework on asylum. It welcomed the withdrawal of a reservation to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and encouraged the withdrawal of remaining reservations. It made a recommendation. 93. Indonesia commended the withdrawal by Jordan of its reservations to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the strategy launched by the National Commission for Women to support the political participation of women. It appreciated measures adopted to defend the rights of foreign workers. It made recommendations. 94. Iraq noted the importance given to promoting human rights by Jordan, as reflected in the inclusion of human rights provisions in 42 constitutional articles which has led to greater judicial independence. It commended the establishment of an independent electoral commission. It made recommendations.  95. Ireland commended the constitutional amendments of 2011, particularly the confirmation of the presumption of innocence before trial, but noted concerns regarding fair trial standards, judicial independence, the lack of appropriate punishment for torture and the lack of adequate compensation for victims of torture. It also noted restrictions on the establishment of civil society organizations. It made recommendations. 96. Italy encouraged efforts to modify legislation further, following the amendments in 2011, and asked whether reforms to limit or abolish administrative detention had been considered. It stated that the ban on websites was not consistent with the rights to freedom of expression and to information. It made recommendations. 97. Kuwait noted that the consultations with government institutions and civil society in preparing the national report demonstrated the commitment of Jordan to human rights obligations under international law. The media strategy 2011Ð2015 would ensure and protect the independence of private media and shows the commitment of Jordan to freedom of opinion and of expression. It made a recommendation. 98. Kyrgyzstan noted that Jordan had dedicated itself to the implementation of the recommendations accepted in the first cycle of the universal periodic review. It commended the strengthened legal and institutional framework relating to women, including the national plan for the promotion of womenÕs political and economic participation and related legislation and national strategies on human trafficking and women. It made a recommendation. 99. Lebanon acknowledged the measures adopted to strengthen the legislative and institutional human rights framework and efforts to protect and promote human rights. It made recommendations.  100. Libya noted the commitment of Jordan and its efforts to strengthen human rights, including judicial independence, separation of powers, modernizing the legislation and national strategies. The Constitution ensures all rights and fundamental freedoms. Welcoming cooperation with OHCHR, Libya encouraged efforts to attain the Millennium Development Goals on eradication of poverty, provision of employment, non.discrimination, child health and effective participation. 101. Malaysia recognized efforts to implement previous recommendations related to the Millennium Development Goals. It noted the ongoing democratization process incorporating human rights into national policies and development programmes. Malaysia commended the progress made in the economic empowerment of women and the rights of persons with disabilities. It made recommendations. 102. Maldives commended the active role of the Government in fulfilling its obligations and engaging with the Human Rights Council. It thanked Jordan for its generosity in accommodating thousands of refugees from the region. It appreciated the implementation of previous recommendations, particularly regarding the rights of women. It made recommendations. 103. Mauritania applauded the measures to ensure enjoyment of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, foster democracy, ensure access to health, education and employment, guarantee fundamental freedoms, combat violence against women and children, protect journalists and support vulnerable groups.  104. Mexico welcomed the constitutional amendments on human rights and noted that Jordan was hosting refugees in line with international law. It noted amendments to the Criminal Code, establishing more severe punishments for crimes of sexual violence and eliminating the exoneration of the perpetrators of ÒhonourÓ killings. It made recommendations. 105. Morocco applauded efforts to protect and promote human rights through comprehensive reforms to bolster democracy. It appreciated the efforts to implement previous recommendations, especially legislative amendments and harmonization with international conventions and welcomed measures to protect women and children. It made recommendations.  106. The Netherlands noted the institutional burden of hosting refugees, but hoped the legislative and constitutional reform would continue. The constitutional amendment of 2011 regarding the State Security Court should be enacted and implemented. It noted discrimination against women married to foreigners. It made recommendations. 107. Nicaragua, noting implementation of previous recommendations, especially regarding the rights of women, encouraged consideration of their economic, social and cultural empowerment. It recognized the efforts of Jordan in hosting the refugees and encouraged the continuation of these efforts in cooperation with the international community. It made a recommendation. 108. The Jordanian delegation referred to the enormous efforts made by the country in hosting and supporting Syrian refugees. There are currently over 1.3 million Syrians in a country with a population of almost 7 million, creating tremendous pressure and challenges for Jordan to meet the  needs of the refugees, particularly because of its scarce water and energy supplies. The health, infrastructure and education systems are not capable of absorbing this large influx. Many schools have to use double shifts in order to include the refugee children. Jordan has only received approximately 30 to 40 per cent of the financial aid it needs in order to sustain the Syrian refugees. It supports the Syrian refugees on behalf of the international community, but this burden is not equally shared. The employment sector, accommodation costs and inflation have also been negatively affected by the the presence of the refugees.  109. The delegation referred to the comments made about the news websites and noted that 140 websites are properly registered and are working properly, freely and independently. 110. Regarding impunity in cases of violence against women, the delegation stated that the laws and provisions of the penal code do not discriminate against women; on the contrary the sanctions are harder in some cases when the victim is a woman. The law on protection from domestic violence was adopted in order to ensure the full implementation of due process. 111. The delegation stated that the recent constitutional amendments clearly show the commitment of Jordan to combating torture. A national monitoring team is in charge of detecting torture; it includes the National Human Rights Commission and NGOs. There are also standard training systems for prosecutors, investigators and law enforcement officers on how to investigate and report torture. The civil code provides general rules regarding compensation which victims of torture can use. Under the recent constitutional amendments, the jurisdiction of the State Security Court has been limited to cases of crimes of treason, espionage and terrorism, drug-related crimes and the counterfeiting of currency; in addition, following the recent constitutional amendments, civilians only appear before civilian judges.  112. The delegation stated that the draft law on the rights of child is in the legislative process, however some members of civil society have asked for the draft to be withdrawn and requested a more rights-based and inclusive dialogue to discuss the law before its adoption and the Government has agreed to this request. The process of amending the draft law for protection against domestic violence has started with the aim of including provisions that strengthen protection of women, children and the family as a whole. The Government has also finalized the draft law on juveniles which is in compliance with international standards and ensures the protection and security of juveniles in detention centres and elsewhere. The Government has recently submitted plans to reform social provisions for the protection of vulnerable groups, including persons with disabilities. For social care institutions, the national team for monitoring and inspection is fully composed of civil society organizations for the best interests of the beneficiaries. 113. The delegation stated that civil society organizations voiced comments regarding registration and financing under the Law on Associations and amendments have been made. The new provisions will be adopted, providing greater flexibility in access to finances.  114. The delegation repeated earlier statistics on the success of empowering women in politics and also referred to its efforts to strengthen the economic rights of women. A recently adopted law on the pension rights of women will give them their own pension and that of a deceased husband. As for protection of women from sexual harassment in the work place, the Penal Code criminalizes sexual harassment. The Labour Law has additional sanctions for employers who commit sexual harassment. An employerÕs workplace will be closed down if a woman is subjected to sexual harassment by him. 115. In conclusion, the delegation stated that Jordan took serious note of all the remarks and interventions. Everything raised in this review is appreciated by Jordan. 116. In relation to the international human rights treaties, the delegation promised that Jordan will take all necessary measures to sign the International Convention for the Protection of all Persons from Enforced Disappearance.  117. The delegation reiterated the positive and open attitude of Jordan to the universal periodic review and restated its commitment to development and the implementation of human rights. It stated that the interactive dialogue had been beneficial and will be seriously taken into consideration for the sake of the promotion and protection of human rights.II. Conclusions and/or recommendations118. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue/listed below have been examined by Jordan and enjoy the support of Jordan: 118.1. Continue its efforts to integrate into domestic legislation the provisions of the human rights treaties which it has ratified (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela); 118.2. Continue to integrate national procedures with acceptable international human rights mechanisms (Sudan); 118.3. Amend relevant national laws and regulations by 1 October 2014, as stipulated in the Constitution (Denmark); 118.4. Initiate a process of revision of the Penal Code and laws on publications which includes civil society and international experts and is based on international standards (Switzerland); 118.5. Amend the Penal Code and relevant legislation to end impunity for torture and ensure victimsÕ right to justice and to compensation (Ireland); 118.6. Continue its efforts on alignment of national legislations and international standards and good practices of human rights, especially those on civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights (Viet Nam);118.7. Fast-track the issuance of newly proposed laws such as the child rights law, and the laws regulating centres and institutions for disabled persons (Tunisia); 118.8. Review all executive laws relevant to juveniles (State of Palestine); 118.9. Strengthen legislation protecting women and girls from forced or underage marriage and strengthen its penal code regarding rape, in particular by removing article 308 and amending the Penal Code to remove the exemption of those accused of honour crimes from prosecution, and strengthen the enforcement of this legislation, particularly in refugee camps (Canada); 118.10. Ensure the inclusion of all parts of the society in the drafting of laws (Bahrain); 118.11. Continue its efforts in the promotion and protection of human rights (Yemen); 118.12. Continue building the national human rights institutional framework and ensure its effective functioning (Ukraine); 118.13. Provide the Jordanian National Centre for Human Rights and other relevant institutions with adequate human, technical and financial resources so that they can properly fulfil their mandate (Sierra Leone); 118.14. Continue its efforts to strengthen the role of its national mechanisms and institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights in the country, particularly those of women and children (Bhutan); 118.15. Further promote the respect of human rights by executing public awareness campaigns on issues such as equal treatment between women and men, combating child labour, human trafficking and domestic violence (Cambodia); 118.16. Take measures aimed at the further strengthening of national human rights institutions and continue its policy of aligning national legislation with international obligations (Pakistan); 118.17. Continue to focus on human rights education through awareness-raising campaigns as well as necessary legislation (Pakistan); 118.18. Continue national efforts that aim to promote a culture of and the principles of human rights, including them in the educational curriculum (Saudi Arabia); 118.19. Continue strengthening its efforts in the promotion and protection of the rights of vulnerable groups, particularly women and persons with disabilities (Brunei Darussalam); 118.20. Enhance ongoing efforts regarding human rights education and training for all public officials (Greece); 118.21. Step up its efforts through providing mandatory human rights education and training for law enforcement personnel, the judiciary, prison guards and other relevant public officials (Slovenia); 118.22. Continue to devote special attention to the promotion and protection of the human rights of vulnerable groups, such as women, children and the elderly (Russian Federation); 118.23. Intensively pursue current national priorities and strategies, with effective measures focusing on the rights to health, education, gender equality, social protection and womenÕs participation in employment and sociopolitical progress (Viet Nam); 118.24. Guarantee the protection of child rights and provide adequate juvenile justice facilities (United Arab Emirates); 118.25. Ensure proper implementation of and execution of legal provisions relevant to the protection of womenÕs rights, and child rights specifically and the family in general (Algeria); 118.26. Continue to conduct outreach activities to raise the awareness of people on human rights (Afghanistan); 118.27. Continue to be persistent in rejecting any attempt to impose foreign values over Jordanian social principles (Sudan); 118.28. Refuse any attempts to enforce principles outside internationally binding mechanisms, as per the internationally recognized human rights principles (Egypt); 118.29. Continue the constructive cooperation with the human rights treaty bodies (Bangladesh); 118.30. Continue its efforts to promote gender equality and womenÕs empowerment (Singapore); 118.31. Take further steps to address discrimination against women, with a particular focus on reducing violence against women (Australia); 118.32. Ensure increased access to health services and education for all, particularly for rural women (Thailand); 118.33. Grant equal citizenship rights to men and women (France); 118.34. Accelerate the efforts to finalize the adoption of the special system for alimony loans (State of Palestine); 118.35. Increase efforts to promote awareness on the social level through continuing campaigns that aim at combating all types of discrimination linked to negative cultural norms while protecting the cultural identity of the society (Egypt); 118.36. Continue with the efforts to fight against discrimination suffered by children, especially girls with disabilities (Argentina); 118.37. Continue and strengthen efforts to prevent torture and ill-treatment in detention facilities and ensure that all allegations of torture are promptly, thoroughly and independently investigated (Australia); 118.38. Continue centring human rights educational programmes for law enforcement officers on issues of combating torture and respect for human rights (Ukraine); 118.39. Continue to take measures to protect children against economic exploitation and violence (Nigeria); 118.40. Continue efforts to eradicate child labour within the framework of protection and promotion of the rights of the child (Ecuador); 118.41. Consider the possibility of introducing amendments to the legislation relating to combating domestic violence (Russian Federation); 118.42. Ensure that all administrative detainees have the possibility of filing a lawsuit challenging the legality of their detention (Switzerland); 118.43. Strengthen measures to protect women who are victims of or are threatened with violence (France); 118.44.  Effectively implement the law on violence against women (Slovenia);  118.45.  Reduce all forms of violence against women and children (Estonia);  118.46.  Intensify efforts to boost the status of women and eliminate all forms of violence against them (Nigeria); 118.47. Provide training for law enforcement officials dealing with violence against women and ensure the effective protection of victims (Slovakia); 118.48. Continue working to eradicate the practices that allow rapists to avoid prosecution if they marry their victims (Guatemala); 118.49. Revise all laws relevant to protection from domestic violence (Tunisia); 118.50. Ensure the amendment of the law on domestic violence and its prevention (Algeria); 118.51. Ensure proper and effective investigation of all crimes against women, including those with an ÒhonourÓ element (Slovakia); 118.52. Better protect women against all forms of violence, including honour killings, as required under the Criminal Code, the Law on Protection of the Family and the Law of Civil Status (Belgium); 118.53. Continue with the measures aimed at eradicating customs involving revenge practices and honour crimes (Argentina); 118.54. Pay attention to the trafficking in women and children for sexual and other exploitative, purposes, preventing and combating such trafficking, also by means of including in the Human Trafficking Act a definition of trafficking, and ensure that trafficked women and girls have access to quality medical care, counselling and shelter (Kyrgyzstan); 118.55. Work towards the elimination of early, forced and child marriages, in particular taking steps to further limit the circumstances in which those under 18 years of age can marry (Sierra Leone); 118.56. Share its expertise in the field of strengthening the judicial system with other countries and continue to train judges to implement international conventions in their judgements (Oman); 118.57. Continue training and capacity building for judges and specialists to deal with vulnerable persons (Bahrain); 118.58. Take the necessary measures to raise the minimum age of criminal responsibility in order to align it with international human rights standards (Uruguay); 118.59. Put in practice a broad system of alternative measures to deprivation of liberty of minors so that it is used only as a last resort, for the shortest time possible and in the appropriate conditions (Uruguay); 118.60. Limit the use and duration of administrative detention (France); 118.61. Take measures aiming at further ensuring for the administrative detainees, duly supported by legal assistance, their right of taking proceedings before a court to challenge the lawfulness of their detention (Italy); 118.62. Ensure respect of fair and equitable judicial proceedings (France);  118.63. Guarantee in law the right to representation for defendants and carry out the necessary actions to implement it in practice (Mexico); 118.64. Adopt further law amendments to abolish the State Security Court or, at a minimum, ensure that civilians are not tried for crimes not listed under the jurisdiction of the court and either release political activists in detention or try their cases in civilian courts (Netherlands); 118.65. Establish operational mechanisms to receive complaints of any racist acts, investigate them and issue sanctions and compensation commensurate with their seriousness (Sierra Leone); 118.66. Abolish or amend all Penal Code articles that place impermissible restrictions on the freedom of expression (Norway); 118.67. Amend the law to ensure greater guarantees for freedom of opinion and expression in line with article 15(1) of the amended Jordanian Constitution and articles 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 118.68. Take appropriate legislative steps to ensure the full protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, in particular with regard to electronic publications and online journalism (Germany); 118.69. Ensure that the legislation and the State respect articles 19 and 21 of International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which guarantee freedom of expression and freedom of association and assembly (Spain); 118.70. Promote and uphold freedom of the media and the right to freedom of expression and to ensure that legislation and State practice are brought in line with article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; (Austria); 118.71. Review the Press and Publications Law in order to fully guarantee freedom of expression (Spain); 118.72. Fully ensure the right to exercise freedom of expression, including Internet freedom, and, in this respect, amend the regulations for online media (Estonia); 118.73. Guarantee freedom of opinion and expression in accordance with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (France); 118.74. Revise the law on the press and publications to reduce restrictions on the information on the Internet (France); 118.75. Ensure in law and judicial practice, the proportionality of sentences for defamation or expression offences (France); 118.76. Re-evaluate the recent amendments to the Press and Publications Law, the Law of Information System Crimes and the Penal Code which threaten the right to freedom of expression, in particular online (Austria); 118.77. Conduct impartial investigations into all cases of attacks, harassment and intimidation of journalists and bring perpetrators to justice (Austria); 118.78. Amend the Press and Publications Law to allow for open channels of public communication in print and online media and for greater access to public information in order for citizens to participate more meaningfully in the public sphere (United States of America); 118.79. Start a dialogue with relevant stakeholders and civil society with a view to revise the Press and Publications Law and its last amendments, adopted in September 2012 (Italy); 118.80. Continue efforts to execute the national media strategy in cooperation with all relevant partners (Kuwait); 118.81. Take measures to allow peaceful public meetings to be held freely and avoid using politicized charges and vague terminology which prevent citizens from exercising their freedom of assembly and association (Mexico); 118.82. Continue to promote womenÕs political participation and representation at national and local levels, including in the cabinet, political parties and the judicial system (Thailand); 118.83. Exert more effort to promote womenÕs participation in public life through executing the national strategy for Jordanian women 2012Ð2015 (Qatar); 118.84. Continue to tackle the issue of womenÕs empowerment in the light of the recommendations emerging from this review and of those made by the relevant treaty bodies (Nicaragua); 118.85. Continue to pursue policies with the view of better promoting participation of women in the political life (Greece); 118.86. Consider launching awareness-raising campaigns on the empowerment of women in public and political life (Turkey); 118.87. Take further measures to increase the participation of women in political life (Rwanda); 118.88. Continue with its efforts to promote womenÕs participation in the political sphere (Turkey); 118.89. Continue efforts to increase womenÕs participation in political life, both in elected positions and in discretionary appointments (Costa Rica); 118.90. Continue its ongoing efforts in promoting and enhancing womenÕs political participation, including through the implementation of the national coalition this strategy for the period 2012Ð2017 (Indonesia); 118.91. Redouble efforts to ensure the empowerment of women in political and economic plans in order to reduce gender inequalities (Djibouti); 118.92. Continue its measures in fostering womenÕs advancement, including intensifying efforts to increase the number of women in decision-making posts (Malaysia); 118.93. Adopt further measures to increase the participation of women in political life, including to serve as senior level officials in the executive and judicial branches, at the national and local levels (Maldives); 118.94. Continue the efforts which aim at expanding the inclusion of the general public in the decision-making process (Lebanon); 118.95. Strengthen labour protections for all workers in Jordan, with special emphasis on migrants, children, and domestic workers (United States of America); 118.96. Ensure through the Labour Code, as well as in practice, the protection of the rights of all workers in Jordan, regardless of their origin (France); 118.97. Revise current labour laws (Iraq); 118.98. Increase the work on promotion of womenÕs participation in the labour market (Lebanon); 118.99. Increase the protection of female domestic workers through amending systems and procedures (State of Palestine); 118.100. Redouble the efforts to eradicate poverty and unemployment (Cuba); 118.101. Continue the efforts to promote and protect the right to health and the right to education for its people in order to further improve the standard of living for all (Brunei Darussalam); 118.102. Continue to undertake measures to eliminate poverty and combat unemployment (Sri Lanka); 118.103. Promote awareness of the rights of those receiving social benefits and advocate them through adequate campaigns (Iraq); 118.104. Expand in the acquisition of social services benefits from specialized organizations through agreements that are periodically renewed (Iraq); 118.105. Create independent monitoring mechanisms for the control of institutions and centres for social care (Morocco); 118.106. Ensure the use of electronic monitoring systems in centres and institutions that provide social care (Morocco); 118.107. Ensure the promotion of the family and its protection from social, health and security threats (United Arab Emirates); 118.108. Continue efforts to improve the health-care system, especially for girls and boys (Cuba); 118.109. Continue its efforts to improve access to quality education for all (Singapore); 118.110. Adopt legislation protecting women with mental disabilities from forced sterilization (Hungary); 118.111. Take further measures towards the full realization of the national strategy for the protection of persons with disabilities (Russian Federation); 118.112. Continue with efforts to raise the living standards of persons with disabilities (Nigeria); 118.113. Further intensify its efforts to raise the living standards of persons with disabilities, in particular to support their right to social inclusion and self-reliance (Malaysia); 118.114. Improve access for persons with disabilities to public facilities, including schools (United States of America); 118.115. Continue its successful efforts to improve the living conditions of persons with disabilities (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela); 118.116. Strengthen in the field the rights of persons with disabilities despite difficulties (Djibouti); 118.117. Continue efforts in requesting support to intensify the abilities of Jordan to respond to the needs of Syrian refugees who are present on Jordanian territory (Qatar); 118.118. Further properly accommodate refugees in the country with the further support of international bodies and donors (China); 118.119. Continue national efforts in granting humanitarian aid to the Syrian refugees with the support of the international community (Saudi Arabia); 118.120. Pursue a policy of protecting and promoting the rights of migrant workers (Djibouti); 118.121. Continue to adopt strategies and enforce policies and procedures needed to ensure the protection and the respect of migrant workers; halt all means of discrimination in the workplace; ensure equality in salaries and benefits and ensure the efficiency of the justice mechanisms (Egypt); 118.122. Continue its efforts with a view to ensuring the protection and promotion of the rights of foreigners working in Jordan (Indonesia); 118.123. Strengthen efforts to safeguard the rights of women migrant workers (Sri Lanka); 118.124. Amend labour laws to ensure increased protection for migrant workers in the Jordanian labour market (United Arab Emirates); 118.125. Continue its efforts to ensure access to water by improving water services (Bangladesh); 118.126. Further improve social security, health and employment of the population (China). 119. The following recommendations will be examined by Jordan which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the twenty-fifth session of the Human Rights Council in March 2014: 119.1. Ratify the Agreement on Privileges and Immunities to the International Criminal Court (Estonia); 119.2. Consider the recommendation of the special rapporteur on violence against women who expressed concern that the violence has resulted in the form of a culture of impunity (Chile); 119.3. Consider the inclusion of ÒgenderÓ among the criteria of discrimination (Romania); 119.4. Enshrine equality before the law for all persons within the Jordanian jurisdiction, including the amendment of the Personal Status Act to address discrimination against women in relation to inheritance, the right to work, divorce and guardianship (Sierra Leone); 119.5. Officially and publicly condemn all acts of torture and ill-treatment so that they do not remain unpunished, resorting to civilian and not to military justice (Spain); 119.6. Adopt targeted measures to ensure the full implementation of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment including by disseminating information to increase awareness among law enforcement personnel, by making sure that there is no impunity for acts of torture and by providing redress and adequate compensation to victims of torture (Germany); 119.7. Remove extenuating circumstances for ÒhonourÓ killings (France); 119.8. Rescind the recent amendments to the Penal Code, Press and Publications Law and the Law of Information System Crimes (Norway); 119.9. Amend the Press and Publications Law to promote an open and free press, including by broadening the definition of a journalist and by removing fines and the requirement for permission prior to publication, and ensuring freedom of Internet media (Canada); 119.10. Take measures to strengthen the freedom and independence of the media, particularly electronic media, and consider removing the registration requirement for independent Internet sites (Mexico); 119.11. Amend the Law on Societies to remove undue restrictions and facilitate the ability of civil society organizations to seek, secure and use resources, including foreign funding, in order to ensure the full enjoyment of the right to peaceful assembly and association (Ireland); 119.12. Take measures to foster an enabling environment for civil society, including by amending the Societies Act to remove the restrictions on the establishment of civil society organizations, eliminate the role of government in civil society organizations, including in appointing State employees to newly established civil society organizations, remove the requirement for Cabinet approval of foreign funding for civil society organizations as well as any other undue restrictions and controls by the Government on them (Canada); 119.13. Adopt laws that guarantee the rights of refugees and asylum seekers, that establish the prohibition of expulsion, return and extradition of a person to another State in case that there are well-founded reasons to believe that this person would be in danger of being subjected to torture or ill-treatment (Uruguay). 120. The recommendations below did not enjoy the support of Jordan: 120.1. Consider acceding to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its Protocol (Rwanda); 120.2. Accede to the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness (Uruguay); 120.3. Ratify the Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Romania); 120.4. Abolish the death penalty in law and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political rights (France); 120.5. Consider withdrawing their reservations to articles 9 para. 2, and 16 para. 1(c), (d) and (g) of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Slovakia); 120.6. Lift reservations to articles 9 and 16 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women relating to nationality and to discrimination in family relations (Norway); 120.7. Lift the remaining reservations to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, as well as the reservations made to the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Slovenia); 120.8. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Belgium); 120.9. Lift all its reservations to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Belgium); 120.10. Lift the reservation to Article 9(2) of the CEDAW Convention (Brazil); 120.11. Withdraw its reservations to article 9 paragraph 2 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Maldives); 120.12. Consider the possibility to withdraw the reservation to article 9 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women with the aim of providing Jordanian women with the right to pass on the nationality to their children (Ecuador); 120.13. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Costa Rica); 120.14. Consider positively acceding to the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Italy); 120.15. Strengthen protection provided for persons deprived of their liberty, preferably by ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Denmark); 120.16. Consider making the declarations under Articles 21 and 22 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Germany); 120.17. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and establish a national preventive mechanism (Switzerland); 120.18. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Estonia); 120.19. Consider ratifying the Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Rwanda); 120.20. Consider ratifying the Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Philippines); 120.21. Ratify the Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Chad); 120.22. Consider ratifying International Labour Organization Convention No. 189 (2011) concerning decent work for domestic workers (Philippines); 120.23. Intensify efforts to repeal all provisions discriminating against women that still persist in its domestic laws, with the aim of guaranteeing full compliance with provisions of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and other international standards (Uruguay); 120.24. Amend the law so that it allows women married to foreigners to pass on their Jordanian nationality to their children and thus allow these children access to basic education and health services (Netherlands); 120.25. Consider the introduction of possible amendments to its national legislation on citizenship and nationality, so that, with respect to such issues, men and women are treated on an equal basis before the law (Cyprus); 120.26. Amend the Citizenship and Nationality Law to enable Jordanian women to pass on their nationality to their children and spouses on an equal basis with Jordanian men (Norway); 120.27. Go one step further and abolish completely the death penalty in its national legislation (Switzerland); 120.28. Establish an official moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing the death penalty and acceding to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights on the abolition of the death penalty (Australia); 120.29. Officially and publicly condemn all acts of torture and ill-treatment and ensure transparent, effective and impartial investigations into any alleged cases as well as ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Austria); 120.30. Prevent cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment in all places of detention, fight against impunity of perpetrators of such acts and recognize the competence of the Committee against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (France); 120.31. Remove jurisdiction over torture cases involving police and prison abuse from the Police Court to civil courts (Brazil); 120.32. Repeal the provisions in the revision of the Penal Code which criminalize defamation of political or religious entities and align its legislation on freedom of expression with international standards in this field (Belgium); 120.33. Amend the Penal Code to ensure its articles, in particular article 149, cannot be used as a mechanism to refer genuine political activists (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 120.34. Ensure efforts to continue amending the Electoral Law of 2010 with the aim that Jordanians of all ethnic origins as well as non-national residents are proportionally represented in national affairs (Chile). 121. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex [English only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of Jordan was headed by H.E. Dr. Mohammad Hussein Al Momani, Minister of State for Media Affairs and Communications and composed of the following members: ¥ H.E. Dr. Rajab M. Sukayri, Permanent Representative of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan to the United Nations Office and other international organizations at Geneva ¥ Mr. Muhib Nimrat, Director of the Human Rights Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Expatriate Affairs ¥ Ms. Dana Khries, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan to the United Nations Office and other international organizations at Geneva ¥ Dr. Hakem Al Khreishah, Director of the Human Rights Department, Ministry of the Interior ¥ Judge 	Ali Al Museimi, Director of the Human Rights Department, Ministry of Justice ¥ Mrs. Lina	 Tarkan, Assistant to the Secretary General, Ministry of Political and Parliamentary Affairs ¥ Mr. Ayesh Al Awamleh, Director of Legal Affairs Department, Ministry of Social Development ¥ Mr. RaÕed Abu Orabi, Attorney General, Public Security Directorate  ¥ Mr. Montaser Al Batayneh, Military Prosecutor, Ministry of the Interior ¥ Judge Dr. Mansour Al Tawalbeh, Sharia Court  ¥ Mr. Mohammad Hani Khreisat, Human Rights Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Expatriate Affairs ¥ Mrs. Ghadeer Attiyeh, Ministry of Labour ¥ H.E. Dr. Mousa Braizat, Commissioner of the National Centre for Human Rights ¥ Mr. Kamal 	Al Mashriki, Freedom of Change Academy for Democratic and Development Studies ¥ Mrs. Amal Haddadin, Legal Adviser, Jordanian National Commission for Women 